For those of uswith one footon the other side.ContentsTitle PageDedicationChapter OneChapter TwoChapter ThreeChapter FourChapter FiveASỤGHARAChapter SixChapter SevenChapter EightChapter NineChapter TenChapter ElevenChapter TwelveỊLAGHACHỊChapter ThirteenChapter FourteenChapter FifteenChapter SixteenChapter SeventeenChapter EighteenChapter NineteenNZỌPỤTAChapter TwentyChapter Twenty-OneChapter Twenty-TwoAcknowledgmentsAbout the AuthorCopyrightChapter OneI have lived many lives inside this body.I lived many lives before they put me in this body.I will live many lives when they take me out of it.WeThe first time our mother came for us, we screamed.We were three and she was a snake, coiled up on thetile in the bathroom, waiting. But we had spent the lastfew years believing our body—thinking that our motherwas someone different, a thin human with rougedcheekbones and large bottle-end glasses. And so wescreamed. The demarcations are not that clear whenyou’re new. There was a time before we had a body, whenit was still building itself cell by cell inside the thin woman,meticulously producing organs, making systems. We usedto flit in and out to see how the fetus was doing, whistlingthrough the water it floated in and harmonizing with thesongs the thin woman sang, Catholic hymns from herfamily, their bodies stored as ashes in the walls of acathedral in Kuala Lumpur. It amused us to distort thechanting rhythm of the music, to twist it around the fetustill it kicked in glee. Sometimes we left the thin woman’sbody to float behind her and explore the house she kept,following her through the shell-blue walls, watching her asshe pressed dough into rounds and chapatis bubbled underher hands.She was small, with dark eyes and hair, light brownskin, and her name was Saachi. She’d been born sixth outof eight children, on the eleventh day of the sixth month, inMelaka, on the other side of the Indian Ocean. Later, sheflew to London and married a man named Saul in a flurryof white sari, veil, and flowers. He was a forceful man witha rake’s smile and deep brown skin, tight black coilscropped close to his head. He sang Jim Reeves in anexaggerated baritone, spoke fluent Russian and knewLatin, and danced the waltz. There were twelve yearsbetween them, but still, the couple was beautiful, wellmatched, moving through the gray city with grace.By the time our body was embedded in her lining, theyhad moved to Nigeria and Saul was working for QueenElizabeth Hospital in Umuahia. They already had a littleboy, Chima, who had been born in Aba three years before,but for this baby (for us), it was important that they returnto Umuahia, where Saul was born, and his father beforehim, and his before that. The blood following paths into thesoil, oiling the gates, calling the prayer into flesh. Later,there would be another girl child, born back in Aba, andSaul would sing to both the girls in his baritone, teachthem how to waltz, and look after their cats when they lefthim.But before the girls were born, they (the thin womanand the forceful man) lived in a large house in the doctors’quarters, the place with the hibiscus outside and the shellblue inside. Saachi was a nurse, a practical woman, sobetween the both of them, the odds were good that thenew baby would live. When we got tired of the house, wefluttered and swooped, playing in the compound andwatching the yam tendrils crawl up their supporting sticks,the silk of corn drying up as it ripened, the swelling andpatched yellowing of the mangoes before they fell. Saachiwould sit and watch Saul fill two buckets with thosemangoes and bring them to her. She ate them all the wayfrom their skins through their wet flesh to her teethscraping like dry bone against the seeds. Then she mademango jam, mango juice, mango everything. She ate ten totwenty of them each day, then a few of the large avocados,slicing those around the pit and scooping their butterdown her throat. And so our fetus body was fed and wevisited, and when we were tired of their world, we left forour own. Back then, we were still free. It was nothing toslip away, along the bitter streams of chalk.In those Queen Elizabeth days, their taxi driver was aman who plastered the inside of his car with a slogan, NOSHORTCUT TO SUCCESS. The same words, growing thick asstickers piled on one another, some peeling and othersglistening new. Every day, Saachi left her little boy, Chima,at home with his nanny, and the taxi driver would take herfrom the compound to Saul’s clinic in the interior of thevillage. That morning (the day we died and were born), herlabor started as they drove down the twisting red roads.The driver spun the wheel around, following her gaspedorders, and took her to Aloma Hospital instead. As herbody called to us and wrung itself out, all Saachi couldfocus on were those stickers, swarming around the seats,reminding her that the short way did not exist.Meanwhile, we were wrenched, dragged through thegates, across a river, and through the back door of the thinwoman’s womb, thrust into the rippling water and thesmall sleeping body floating within. It was time. When thefetus had been housed, we were allowed freedom, but itwas going to be alone, no longer flesh within a house but ahouse itself, and we were the one meant to live in it. Wewere used to the warm thuds of two heartbeats separatedby walls of flesh and liquid, used to the option of leaving,of returning to the place we came from, free like spiritsare meant to be. To be singled out and locked into theblurred consciousness of a little mind? We refused. Itwould be madness.The thin woman’s body was prone to quick labors. Theboy, the first child, had been born in an hour, and a yearafter we were born, the third child would take only two.We, the middle, held the body against the pull for six. Noshortcuts.It was the sixth day of the sixth month.Eventually, the doctors slid a needle into Saachi and fedher from a drip, fighting our resistance with drugs,expelling the body that was becoming ours. And so wewere trapped by this unfamiliar birthing, this abominationof the fleshly, and this is how we ended up here.*We came from somewhere—everything does. When thetransition is made from spirit to flesh, the gates are meantto be closed. It’s a kindness. It would be cruel not to.Perhaps the gods forgot; they can be absentminded likethat. Not maliciously—at least, not usually. But these aregods, after all, and they don’t care about what happens toflesh, mostly because it is so slow and boring, unfamiliarand coarse. They don’t pay much attention to it, exceptwhen it is collected, organized and souled.By the time she (our body) struggled out into the world,slick and louder than a village of storms, the gates wereleft open. We should have been anchored in her by then,asleep inside her membranes and synched with her mind.That would have been the safest way. But since the gateswere open, not closed against remembrance, we becameconfused. We were at once old and newborn. We were herand yet not. We were not conscious but we were alive—infact, the main problem was that we were a distinct weinstead of being fully and just her.So there she was: a fat baby with thick, wet black hair.And there we were, infants in this world, blind and hungry,partly clinging to her flesh and the rest of us trailingbehind in streams, through the open gates. We’ve alwayswanted to think that it was a careless thing the gods did,rather than a deliberate neglect. But what we think barelymatters, even being who we are to them: their child. Theyare unknowable—anyone with sense realizes that—andthey are about as gentle with their own children as theyare with yours. Perhaps even less so, because yourchildren are just weak bags of flesh with a timed soul. We,on the other hand—their children, the hatchlings, godlings,ọgbanje—can endure so much more horror. Not that thismattered—it was clear that she (the baby) was going to gomad.We stayed asleep, but with our eyes open, still latchedon to her body and her voice as she grew, in those firstslow years when nothing and everything happens. She wasmoody, bright, a heaving sun. Violent. She screamed a lot.She was chubby and beautiful and insane if anyone hadknown enough to see it. They said she followed herfather’s side, the grandmother who was dead, for her darkskin and her thick hair. Saul did not name her after hismother, though, as perhaps another man would have.People were known to return in renovated bodies; ithappens all the time. Nnamdi. Nnenna. But when helooked into the wet blackness of her eyes, he—surprisinglyfor a blind man, a modern man—did not make thatmistake. Somehow, Saul knew that whatever looked backout of his child was not his mother, but someone,something else.Everyone pressed into the air around her, pinching hercheeks and the fatty tissue layered underneath, pulled inby what they thought was her, when it was really us. Evenasleep, there are things we cannot help, like pullinghumans to us. They pull us too, but one at a time; we areselective like that. Saachi watched the visitors flockaround the baby, concern sprouting in her like a greenshoot. This was all new. Chima had been so quiet, sopeaceful, cool to Saachi’s heat. Disturbed, she looked for apottu and found one, a dark circle of velvet black, aportable third eye, and she affixed it to the baby’sforehead, on that smooth expanse of brand-new skin. A sunto repel the evil eye and thwart the intentions of wickedpeople who could coo at a child and then curse it undertheir breath. She was always a practical woman, Saachi.The odds were good that the child would live. At least thegods had chosen responsible humans, humans who lovedher fiercely, since those first few years are when you aremost likely to lose them. Still, it does not make up for whathappened with the gates.The human father, Saul, had missed the birth. We neverpaid him much attention when we were free—he was notinteresting to us; he held no vessels or universes in hisbody. He was off buying crates of soft drinks for the guestswhile his wife fought us for different liberations. Saul wasalways that type of man, invested in status and image andsocial capital. Human things. But he allowed her name andit was later, when we were awake, that we knew that andunderstood at last why he’d been chosen. Many thingsstart with a name.After the boy Chima was born, Saul had asked for adaughter, so once our body arrived, he gave it a secondname that meant “God answered.” He meant godsanswered. He meant that he called us and we answered.He didn’t know what he meant. Humans often pray andforget what their mouths can do, forget that every ear islistening, that when you direct your longing to the gods,they can take that personally.The church had refused to baptize the child without thatsecond name; they considered her first name unchristian,pagan. At the christening, Saachi was still as thin andangular as London while Saul’s stomach was curving out alittle more than it used to, a settled swelling. He wore awhite suit with wide lapels, a white tie lying on a blackshirt, and he stood watching with his hands clasped as thepriest marked the forehead of the baby cradled in hiswife’s arms. Saachi peered down through her thickglasses, focusing on the child with a calm seriousness, herwhite hat pressing on her long black hair, the maroonvelvet of her dress severe at the shoulders. Chima stoodnext to his father in olive khaki, small, his head reachingonly up to Saul’s hands. The priest droned on and we sleptin the child as the stale taste of blessed water soakedthrough her forehead and stretched into our realm. Theykept calling a man’s name, some christ, another god. Theold water beckoned to him and, parallel to us, he turnedhis head.The priest kept talking as the christ walked over,scattering borders, dragging a black ocean behind him. Heran his hands over the baby, pomegranate water andhoney under his fingernails. She had fallen asleep asSaachi held her and she stirred a little under his touch, hereyelids fluttering. We turned over. He inclined his head,that foam of black curl, that nutshell skin, and steppedback. They had offered her to him and he would accept; hedid not mind loving the child. Water trickled into her earas the priest called her second name, the god’s answer,the one the church had demanded because they didn’tknow the first name held more god than they couldimagine.Saul had consulted with his senior brother while pickingout that first name. This brother, an uncle who died beforewe could remember him (a shame; if anyone might haveknown what to do about the gates, it would have beenhim), was named De Obinna and he was a teacher who hadtraveled into those interior villages and knew the thingsthat were practiced there. They said he belonged to theCherubim and Seraphim church, and it seems that he did,when he died. But he was also a man who knew the songsand dances of Uwummiri, the worship that is drowned inwater. All water is connected. All freshwater comes out ofthe mouth of a python. When Saul had the sense not toname the child after her grandmother, De Obinna steppedin and suggested the first name, the one with all the god init. Years later, Saul told the child that the name just meant“precious,” but that translation is loose and inadequate,both correct and incomplete. The name meant, in its truestform, the egg of a python.Before a christ-induced amnesia struck the humans, itwas well known that the python was sacred, beyondreptile. It is the source of the stream, the flesh form of thegod Ala, who is the earth herself, the judge and mother,the giver of law. On her lips man is born and there hespends his whole life. Ala holds the underworld replete inher womb, the dead flexing and flattening her belly, acrescent moon above her. It was taboo to kill her python,and of its egg, they would say, you cannot find it. And ifyou find it, they would add, you cannot touch it. For theegg of a python is the child of Ala, and the child of Ala isnot, and can never be, intended for your hands.This is the child Saul asked for, the prayer’s flesh. It isbetter not to even say that her first name.We called her the Ada.*So. The Ada belonged to us and Ala and Saachi, and as thechild grew, there came a time when she would not moveon all fours, as most babies do. She chose instead towriggle, slithering on her stomach, pressing herself to thefloor. Saachi watched her and wondered idly if she was toofat to crawl properly, observing her tight rolls of new fleshas they wormed across the carpet. “The child crawls like aserpent,” she mentioned, on the phone to her own mother,across the Indian Ocean.At the time, Saul ran a small clinic out of the boys’quarters of the apartment building they lived in on EkennaAvenue, Number Seventeen, made out of thousands ofsmall red bricks. The Ada got a tetanus injection at thatclinic after her brother, Chima, handed their little sister apiece of wood with a nail stuck in it and said, “Hit her withthis.” We didn’t think she would do it so we were notconcerned, but he was the firstborn and she surprised us.We bled a lot and Saul gave us the injection himself, butthe Ada has no scar so perhaps this memory is not real. Wedid not blame the little sister, for we were fond of her. Hername was A uli. She was the last born, the amen at theend of a prayer, always a sweet child. There was a timewhen she used to speak in a language no one but us couldunderstand, being fresh as she was from the other side(but whole, not like us), so we would chatter back to her init and translate for our body’s parents.Early in the mornings, before Saul and Saachi wereawake, the Ada (our body) used to sneak out of theapartment to visit the neighbors’ children. They taught herhow to steal powdered milk and clap it to the top of hermouth with her tongue, flaking it down in bits, that babysmellsweetness. After a few years, Saul and Saachi movedthe family down the street to Number Three, which hadmore bedrooms and an extra bathroom. EventuallyNumber Seventeen was demolished and someone builtanother building there, a house that looked nothing likethe old one, with no red brick anywhere.But the red bricks were still standing when Saachi pottytrained our body, using a potty with a blue plastic seat.The Ada was perhaps three years old, half of six,something. She walked into the bathroom where the pottywas and pulled down her panties, sitting carefully becauseshe was good at this. She was good at other things too—crying, for example, which filled her with purpose,replenished all those little crevices of empty. So when shelooked up and saw a large snake curled on the tile acrossfrom the potty, the first thing our body did was scream.The python raised its head and a length of its body, therest coiled up, scales gliding gently over themselves. It didnot blink. Through its eyes Ala looked at us, and throughthe Ada’s eyes we looked at her—all of us looking uponeach other for the first time.We had a good scream: it was loud and used up most ofour lungs. We paused only to drag in hot flurries of air forthe next round. This screaming had been one of the firstthings Saachi noticed when our body was a baby. Itbecame a running joke in the family: “Aiyoh, you have sucha big mouth!”Since Chima had been such a quiet child, no one hadexpected the Ada to be so loud. After Saachi fed Chimaand bathed him, she could leave him in the playpen and hewould just play, calmly, alone. When our body was sixmonths old, Saachi took us to Malaysia, across the IndianOcean, flying Pakistan Airlines with a layover in Karachi.The staff gave her a bassinet to put us in, but we criedwith such force that Saachi slipped the Ada some chloralhydrate to make her shut up.Back in Aba, Chima used to stare at us in awe becauseour body would scream any time we didn’t get what wewanted. There are limitations in the flesh that intrinsicallymake no sense, constraints of this world that arediametrically opposed to the freedoms we had when weused to trail along those shell-blue walls and dip in and outof bodies at will. This world was meant to bend—that’show it had worked before our body slid through rings andwalls of muscle, opened her eyes, filled her lungs with thisworld, and screamed our arrival. We stayed asleep, yet ourpresence shaped the Ada’s body and her temperament.She pulled out all the buttons on the cushions and shedrew on the walls. Everyone had gotten so used to themischief and the screaming that when the Ada was staringat the snake, frozen in fear and projecting her terrorthrough her mouth, they paid no attention. “She just wantsher own way,” they said, sitting around in the parlor,drinking bottles of Star beer. But this time, she didn’t stop.Saul frowned and exchanged a glance with his wife,concern flitting over their faces. He stood up and went tocheck on the child.Now, Saul was a modern Igbo man. His medical traininghad been on scholarship in the Soviet Union, after whichhe spent many years in London. He did not believe inmumbo-jumbo, anything that would’ve said a snake couldmean anything other than death. When he saw the Ada, hisbaby, with tears dripping down her face, blubbering interror at a python, a wintered fear clutched at his heart.He snatched her up and away, took a machete, went backand hacked the python to bits. Ala (our mother) dissolvedamid broken scales and pieces of flesh; she went back, shewould not return. Saul was angry. It was an emotion thatfelt comfortable, like worn-in slippers. He strode back intothe parlor, hand wrapped in bloody metal, and shouted atthe rest of the house.“When that child cries, don’t take it for granted. Do youhear me?!” The Ada huddled in Saachi’s arms, shaking.He had no idea what he had done.Chapter TwoThe python will swallow anything whole.WeThis is all, ultimately, a litany of madness—the colors of it,the sounds it makes in heavy nights, the chirping of itacross the shoulder of the morning. Think of briefinsanities that are in you, not just the ones that blossomedas you grew into taller, more sinful versions of yourself,but the ones you were born with, tucked behind your liver.Take us, for instance.We did not come alone. With a force like ours, wedragged other things along—a pact, bits of bone, anigneous rock, worn-out velveteen, a strip of human hidetying it all together. This compound object is called the iyi-ụwa, the oath of the world. It is a promise we made whenwe were free and floating, before we entered the Ada. Theoath says that we will come back, that we will not stay inthis world, that we are loyal to the other side. When spiritslike us are put inside flesh, this oath becomes a real object,one that functions as a bridge. It is usually buried orhidden because it is the way back, if you understand thatthe doorway is death. Humans who have sense always lookfor the iyi-ụwa, so they can dig it up or pull it from flesh,from wherever secret place it was kept, so they candestroy it, so their child’s body will not die. If Ala’s wombholds the underworld, then the iyi-ụwa is the shortcut backinto it. If the Ada’s human parents found it and destroyedit, we would never be able to go home.We were not like other ọgbanje. We did not hide itunder a tree or inside a river or in the tangled foundationsof Saul’s village house. No, we hid it better than that. Wetook it apart and we disseminated it. The Ada came withbones anyway—who would notice the odd fragmentswoven in? We hid the igneous rock in the pit of herstomach, between the mucus lining and the muscle layer.We knew it would weigh her down, but Ala carries a worldof dead souls inside her—what is a simple stone to herchild? We put the velveteen inside the walls of her vaginaand we spat on the human hide, wetting like a stream. Itrippled and came alive, then we stretched it from one ofher shoulder blades to the other, draping it over her backand stitching it to her other skin. We made her the oath.To destroy it, they would have to destroy her. To keep heralive, they would have to send her back.We made her ours in many ways, yet we wereoverwhelming to the child. Even though we lay curled andinactive inside her, she could already feel the unsettlingour mere presence caused. We slept so poorly that firstdecade. The Ada kept having nightmares, terrifyingdreams that drove her again and again into her parents’bed. It would be the inky hours of morning and she’d wakeup in cold dripping fear, then tiptoe into their room,creaking the door open gently. Saul always slept on theside of the bed closest to the door with Saachi beside him,next to the window. The Ada would stand next to their bedwith tears falling down her face, hugging her pillow untilone of them sensed that she was there and woke up to findher silently sobbing in the dark, wearing her red pajamaswith the white-striped top.“What happened?” A thousand times.“I had a bad dream.”Poor thing. It wasn’t her fault—she didn’t know that welived in her, not yet. Like a child kicking in their sleep, westruck at her unknowing mind, tossing and turning her.The gates were open and she was the bridge. We had nocontrol; we were always being pulled toward home, andwhen she was unconscious, there was more slip, more givein that direction.The Ada surprised us, though, when she started to enterour realm. There would be a nightmare, ragged breaths offear as we thrashed around, and then one night, she wassuddenly there next to us, looking around at the dream,trying to get out. She was seven or eight and her eyeswere young and calculating—she was brilliant, even beforewe sharpened her. That was one of the reasons Saul hadmarried Saachi; he said he needed an intelligent woman togive him children who would be geniuses.In the dream, the Ada imagined a spoon. It was strange,just a simple tablespoon, floating vertically. But it wasmetal and it was cold, and these things made it real. Nextto it, all the bile we’d been creating was so obviously false.She looked at the spoon, identified which realm itbelonged to (hers, not ours), and woke up. She did thisover and over again, snapping out of the nightmares.Eventually, she didn’t need the spoon at all. The dreamwould twist, getting dark, and the Ada would remindherself of where she was, that yes, she was in a dreamfilled with horror, but she still had the power to leave.With that, she’d drag herself out through glutinous layersof consciousness until she was awake, fully, rib seamsaching. She, our little collection of flesh, had built a bridgeall by herself. We were so proud. We watched her from ourrealm, in those times before we were ready to wake up.And then, one day, awakening arrived.*It was December, during the harmattan, when the Ada wasin the village. Saul always took the family to Umuecheọkụfor Christmas, and afterward, the Ada would go toUmuawa to spend the New Year with her best friend, Lisa.Lisa’s family was a rowdy and boisterous clan, people whoheld the Ada in their arms and kissed her good night andgood morning. The Ada wasn’t used to so much contact.Saul and Saachi were not prone to holding, not like this.So she loved Lisa’s family, and they were the ones whotook her to the masquerade ceremony where ourawakening arrived.That night was black as velvet tamarind, thick in a waythat made people walk closer to each other, pressing in apack that moved down to the village square. The Ada couldhear the music even before they reached the thuddingcrowd. One by one, people around her started tyingbandannas and handkerchiefs over their noses and mouthsbefore they plunged into the cloud of dust where everyonewas dancing and throwing themselves to the music, to thesounds of the ekwe and the ogene.Lisa handed her a white handkerchief, the cotton fallingover her fingers like an egret’s wing. The Ada paused atthe edge, her sandals sinking briefly into the heavy palesand, and she looked on. The quick beat of the ekwe wenthigh and low, low low low, high high, the sound tight andloud. Lisa dipped into the crowd, her eyes crinkled withlaughter above the red bandanna wrapping her face. TheAda felt her heart stagger with the ogene. She tied thehandkerchief around her face and her feet lifted, throwingher into the dancing mass. The dust was weaving in theair, light against her face, softly scraping her eyes. Itbreathed on her skin. Sand flew up around her feet and theskin on her back prickled.The drumming was shaking everything, and the crowdbroke apart in mad rushes as the masquerades dashed atpeople, cracking whips and splitting the air. Their raffiaflew wildly around them, the cowhide springing like afountain from their hands. Their leashes were wrappedaround their waists and their handlers shouted and pulledbehind them as the masquerades flogged people with asharp glee. The music sang commands in an old inheritedlanguage. It drifted into our sleep, our restless slumber; itcalled to us as clearly as blood.Have you forgotten us already?We fluttered. The voice was familiar, layered and many,metal tearing through the air. The ground pounded.We have not forgotten any of your promises, nwanneanyị.The air cracked as we remembered. It was the sound ofour brothersisters, the other children of our mother, theones who had not come across with us. Ndị otu. Ọgbanje.Their earthly masks whirled through the humans and theysmelled like the gates, like sour chalk. Masqueradeceremonies invite spirits, giving them bodies and faces,and so they were here, recognizing us in the midst of theirgames.What are you doing inside that small girl?The Ada lifted up her arms and spun around. The peoplearound her suddenly scattered and she ran with them,squealing as a masquerade lunged in their direction. Itstopped and stood, swaying softly. It had a large face thecolor of old bone and a raw red mouth. It was draped inpurple cloth and balancing a carved headdress, paintedbrightly. The moonlight poured over it. We trembled in oursleep, the taste of clean clay wiping through us. Ourbrothersister tilted its head and the headdress angledsharply against the black sky. It was irritated.Wake up!At the sound of its voice, deep within the Ada, deeperthan the ash of her bones, our eyes tore open. Themasquerade’s handler tugged on the rope around its waistand it spun away. The Ada stood still for a moment beforeLisa appeared, grabbing her hands and whirling her in acircle.They all left a little after midnight, Lisa’s cousinslaughing and smashing beer bottles to the ground in aspray of green glass. Back at the house, the Ada untied thehandkerchief and held it up, unfolded. There were threesplotches of brown, two for her nostrils, one for her mouth.We wish she had saved it, but that is how humans are.Important things slip past in the moment, when it feelssharp and they are young enough to think that the feelingwill remain. Later on, the Ada would remember that nightwith an unfamiliar clarity as one of the few genuinelyhappy times in her childhood. That moment, when our eyesopened in the dust of the village square and we wereawake in both her realm and ours for the first time, it feltlike pure brightness. We were all one, together, balancedfor a brief velvet moment in a village night.We’ve wondered in the years since then what she wouldhave been without us, if she would have still gone mad.What if we had stayed asleep? What if she had remainedlocked in those years when she belonged to herself? Lookat her, whirling around the compound wearing batik shortsand a cotton shirt, her long black hair braided into twoarcs fastened with colored bands, her teeth gleaming andone slipper broken. Like a heaving sun.The first madness was that we were born, that theystuffed a god into a bag of skin.Chapter ThreeWhat is a child who does not have a mother?WeWhen we first entered this world, even after our eyesopened in the village, we remained fogged in newness. Wewere very young. But soon (a matter of years to you butnothing to us), we were forced into sharpness, forced byblood wiped along a tarred road, the separation of a boneat three points, and the migration of a mother.Our brothersisters have always possessed the crueltythat is our birthright. They stacked their bitterness like ayear’s harvest; they bound it all together with anger, longmemories, and petty ways. The Ada had not died, the oathhad not been fulfilled, and we had not come home. Theycould not make us return because they were too far away,but they could do other things in the name of claiming ourhead. There is a method to this. First, harvest the heartand weaken the neck. Make the human mother leave. This,they knew, is how you break a child.Saul and Saachi were living at Number Three then, withthe children and Saul’s niece Obiageli. Obiageli was one ofDe Obinna’s two daughters, but she was not like herfather, she did not know the right songs or dances or thesource of the spring. She was Christian, decidedly so, blindin that way. But she loved the Ada, and sometimes, love isalmost protection enough. When Obiageli’s sister came tovisit, Obiageli left her to babysit. Saachi had a rule: thechildren did not leave the house unless they were with heror Saul. She was a practical woman, so the odds were thatthe child would live.Besides, the mischief of the Ada’s infancy hadprogressed into moody troublemaking. She lost her temperfrequently, slamming doors and fighting with Chima andA uli, the increased weight of her body ricocheting off thewalls of their house. Her anger would mutate hotly intobouts of uncontrolled weeping, until her lungs got tired.She was violent, and years later, it made even her humanmother afraid. Saachi could not discipline the children inthe ways that Saul and Obiageli could, not with fear, notlike a Nigerian. But she did run a tight household; she wastough with anyone who didn’t have her blood in them, andmost of the time no one would have even dreamed ofbreaking her rules.This cousin, however, was only visiting. The salt in thekitchen had finished and she needed to go to the shop toget some more, so she broke the rules and took the girlsout of the house, because they begged to come with her onthat hot and loud afternoon. It was meant to be a quicktrip across Okigwe Road. All they had to do was turn leftwhen they came out of the gate, walk past the man whosold sweets at Number Seven, turn left again at the redgate, and walk until they reached the main road.The whole way, A uli kept talking about crossing theroad by herself; she’d seen other small children doing itand saw no reason she couldn’t. They made it to the cornerwhere the women sold roasted corn and yam and ube overhot coals, and they waited for a gap in the traffic. The Adakept her hand inside her cousin’s wrapped palm, but A ulilooked left, then broke free and darted, small, six, acrossthe road. A pale blue pickup truck came in from the rightand hit her with a sound like the world stopping.The Ada screamed as A uli fell onto the tarreddarkness. The pickup couldn’t stop. The driver tried buthis brakes did not work, the truck could not stop, not evenfor her, not even for her small six-year-old self, for herPink Panther T-shirt and shorts, the snagging of the cottonto its metal undercarriage, for the rubber slippers torn offher feet or the hooking of her shoulders and spine to thetruck’s skeleton. It dragged her small golden body away,down the road, smearing blood in burning tire trails. We(the Ada and us) do not remember our mouth’s sounds, ourown personal screams, nor those of the cousin. We do notremember how the road was crossed, who stood around,who reached out and unhooked the pink splattered clothfrom the underside, what the pickup driver said, whenSaul’s neighbor arrived with the station wagon, who liftedA uli’s awake body from the road and put her in hisbackseat, or how many people were in the car.We do remember how, in the car, our body twisted tolook at A uli screaming behind the driver’s seat, her legdug open from knee to ankle to bone, warm and red andgushing with shocks of white. The girls used to be mirrors,dressed alike, four horns curving down from the sides oftwo heads, before the truck tore one away from the other.The Ada was frantic, shouting, trying to think of how to fixit, who to handle it.“Take her to our father’s hospital, please,” the Adasobbed. The men in the car did not listen to her—the Adawas eight and she was wrong. They took A uli to Lisa’sfather instead. He was an orthopedic surgeon, not agynecologist like Saul. The electric signboard of hishospital was cracked from when someone threw a stone atit during one of the riots, and the building smelled likestrong antiseptic and flesh that had gone off. Someonegave the Ada a Pepsi and took her next door to Lisa’shouse, while Lisa’s mother sent their driver to fetchSaachi. When she arrived, the human mother entered theemergency room and looked at her youngest child, leg laidopen on the examining table. A uli’s Pink Panther shirthad been cut open to get to her chest and it was staineddark with blood. Saachi cried and cried while ourbrothersisters smirked invisibly against the cabinets at thebreaking they had begun.Saul had been at the mechanic shop, and when he got tothe hospital, A uli asked him to give her an injection sothat she could die. She had heard the doctors say theywanted to amputate her leg, and although she was small,she was already certain of what she could not live in thisworld without. Saul fought back tears as he reassured her,then he let them draw his blood for her transfusions. Theytook the Ada home, and for three days, she refused to visither sister. Our brothersisters were pleased with that. Lovefor a human threatens the oath and makes spirits want tostay when they owe debts, when they should return.Finally, Saachi sat down with the Ada. “Tell me,” shesaid. “Why won’t you go to the hospital?”The Ada started sobbing. “It’s my fault …”Saachi looked at her, confused. “Ada, it’s not your faultthe car hit her.”“I’m the big sister … it’s my j-job … t-to protect her …”She broke down wailing and Saachi put an arm aroundher, holding the child to her side and feeling the smallshoulders curve in as they convulsed. We realized, later,that she was always a little uncertain when it came to herfirst daughter, what exactly to do with her, how to soothesuch a force. It was understandable; it is always like thiswith ọgbanje, it is difficult for their mothers. If we could goback, we would tell Saachi what she realized only manyyears later: that none of the ways she tried to take care ofthis child would ever feel like enough.“It’s not your fault,” Saachi repeated.The Ada said nothing, but she didn’t believe her. Dutieswere duties. We agreed with her on this. Over the yearsthat followed, we (the Ada and us) became good atprotecting A uli, except for a terrible oversight in whichwe failed, for a very long time, to protect her from ourself.At the hospital, they cast the amen’s leg in plaster ofParis. They used a mechanical blade to cut the cast openevery time they had to change it, then dressed the woundwith sugar and honey. The first few times, they gave hernarcotics to kill the pain, but then they had to stop, andshe would scream and scream until the dressing was done.When it was over, she laughed. She was, to our surprise,not a being that the brothersisters could break so easily.Saul’s family came up from Umuahia to the hospital tosee her, and old women in the ward drifted from the otherbeds to stand by A uli’s.“Chai,” they said dolefully. “What a beautiful child!”“Ewo!”“What a shame.”After about a week of this, A uli turned to Saachi andasked if she was going to die. The human mother stared ather, this little girl who spoke of death so comfortably. Wewere not surprised, though. Had it not brushed past her onthe bloody tar of that road? She was not afraid. Ourbrothersisters had touched her and she had lived. Sheasked Saachi that because she thought the visitors werethere to mourn her approaching death, and we wereimpressed by this concept, to grieve the loss of breathwhile it was still in the body. After all, since we had beenborn to die, the Ada’s life was a placeholder, an interlude;it made sense to start mourning it now.The Ada became a precocious but easily bruised child,constantly pierced by the world, by words, by the taunts ofChima and his friends as they mocked her body for beingsoft and rounded. Reality was a difficult space for her toinhabit, unsurprisingly, what with one foot on the otherside and gates in between. We wriggled deeply in her,reliving the blood of the backseat over and over again tillthe red was painted all inside. You must understand thatA uli’s accident was a baptism in the best liquid, thatmother of a color, then a clotting movement, a scrambledlook at mortality and the weakness of the vessel. With ourswollen new eyes, we saw the blood and knew it was amantle.We waited.*Things had not been easy for Saachi. They never are whenyou are the type of woman who gets chosen—just ask anyother mother who has had a god grow inside her beforespitting it out into a wild world. When A uli was first born,Saachi became sick. The Ada was focused on her privatemischiefs then—drawing on the walls and destroying thedeep brown leather cushions by tugging on their threads.Chima was in school; he’d started Primary One down byFaulks Road. Saachi was drowning in anxiety. It rattledher chest and surged up her throat; it made her handsshake and then she cried and could not breathe. Saul didnot help. He was an impatient man, a blind man. Thechildren were always more Saachi’s than his.“I can’t stay with you in the house!” he told hispanicking wife. “I have work to do. If you have mentalillness, then you’ll just have to go to London.”That was it. Saachi had to turn to her friends, thewomen who had been born in other countries and who, likeher, had accompanied their husbands to this small, violenttown. Her friend Elena came by to check on her and Lisa’smother sent a girl in the evenings to stay with her,because A uli was just a baby and Saul would not stayhome and Saachi was drowning. Our brothersisters hadknown this, had known where the weak points in the Ada’sfamily were, where to best apply pressure for a breaking.This was at Number Seventeen, at the red brick, and thenext day, Saachi collected her three children and tookthem to Elena’s house. She left them there and went to thehospital, where she stayed for two nights.The doctors told her not to ingest any stimulants, andwhen they left her room, one of them, a woman, remainedand asked Saachi kindly and quietly if everything was okayat home. Because it was strange, you see, the panicattacks and the way Saul was not there. Saachi saideverything was fine. We do not know if she was lying, butthe doctor prescribed medications to slow her heart rate,and after the second night, Saachi checked out, collectedher children, and went back to Number Seventeen. Shetold herself that she would never be in that state again.Every day for a month, while the Ada and Chima played bythemselves, Saachi would put A uli down on a woven mat,then lie on the sofa and cover herself with Chima’s akweteblanket, all the way over her head, making a dark cave.The anxiety curled up on her chest like a cat and purredthrough her bones. She hid and hid, and Saul did not findher because he, as he had made clear, could not be athome with her and therefore was not looking.It’s like we said—things had not been easy for her. Asshe was drowning, the years slid past and the Ada’s familymoved down the street to Number Three. Then there wasthe truck and the amen and the impact and the blood.When A uli could walk again, Saachi said that she wouldneed plastic surgery, skin grafts for the river of glossy scartissue running down toward her foot. She took A uli backto Malaysia to consult with some doctors; she left the Adabehind. While on the trip, Saachi spoke to a nursing agentwho offered her a job in Saudi Arabia.There are many ways of breaking a family and isolatinga child—our brothersisters knew this. Saul, for example,cared more about himself, so he was never going toprotect the Ada and he was too human to be any kind ofthreat to the brothersisters. After career setbacks inLondon, he had been happy to end up in Nigeria, where hewas hailed as a big man, coming from abroad with hisBenz with the customized plates. He needed people to seehim glow; he desired the glory of something. When Saulgot his chieftaincy title, it was like he’d been dipped insilver, like he was finally as shiny as he wanted to be. Hespent a lot of money on new things for himself, money thathe refused to spend in other ways, like on his family.Saachi had to sew her traditional outfit for the ceremonyout of an old sari. They’d fought over this and other things,like Saul refusing to buy things needed for the household.As his clinic struggled, Saachi kept transferring in moneyfrom her accounts in London. Immediately after thechieftaincy ceremony, instead of hosting the visitors whocame to congratulate Saul, Saachi took the children toOnitsha to visit a friend and left a note for her husband.“You may be a chief,” she wrote, “but you are not agod.”She was correct, even more than she knew. He was nota god. He’d had to pray to one in order to get the Ada; shewas not a child he could have created alone. Still, Saachigave him many chances, windows and windows, ways hecould have been worthy. In Malaysia with A uli, after shegot the job offer, Saachi called him.“What do you think?” she said. “Should I take it? Willyou be able to look after the children?”“Let’s talk about it when you get back,” he said.So she flew back to Nigeria with the amen, and by then,the Ada, who had never been without them for this long,almost didn’t recognize them. We, however, knew alreadythat forgetting could be protection.Saul had paid for the trip, and when Saachi told himthat the doctors had advised against skin grafts for A uli’sscar, recommending it be left as it was, Saul hissed. “So itwas just a waste of my money, a wasted trip,” he said, andthen he walked away.Saachi looked at his prideful back, then she looked attheir bank accounts and at their family and she made achoice. It was easier to get free for the sake of her childrenthan for the sake of herself—she did things for the Adathat Saul would never have lifted a finger to do. We admit,we accepted her because of that. She took the job and leftthe house at Number Three and as it turned out, she neverlived there again.Our brothersisters rejoiced from the other side—theyhad succeeded in chasing her away. No god wouldintervene, because ọgbanje are entitled to theirvengeances; it is their nature, they are malicious spirits.Besides, there were many ways to look at what happened.Our brothersisters broke Saachi’s heart, yes, but they alsoset her free, releasing her from the akwete blanket thatSaul had condemned her to. If they had not thrown her lastborn into the road, she would never have gotten away.They meant to punish her: they took her children, theyfilled her mouth with sand. But it is only a fool who doesnot know that freedom is paid for in old clotted blood, infresh reapings of it, in renewed scarifications. If Saachi didnot know this before, then being a god’s surrogate surelytaught it to her. Such lessons are never easy.*The next five years of her life were contracted away inSaudi Arabia, and when that contract ended, Saachi calledSaul.“What do you think?” she asked. “Should I come back toNigeria or should I try London?”Saul had already left in all the ways that mattered, so itwas not surprising that he said nothing, that his mouthwas a gray space. Saachi was alone, and she knew thatalthough Saul hated the money she made, he needed it. Wethought he was weak; we knew he was chosen onlybecause he would give the Ada her correct names. We didnot pay attention to him.In the face of his grayness, Saachi went to London, justto see what it was like and if, perhaps, she could movethem all there. But when a depression seized her, she leftand flew back to her deserts, to Saudi. By the time her lastcontract ended, the human mother had spent ten yearsthere, from Riyadh to Jeddah and, finally, the mountains ofTa’if. She returned to Nigeria once or twice each year withsuitcases that smelled cool and foreign. She left behind thesacrifice of three children fastened to an altar with thinsinews, and she would pay the costs of that for the rest ofher life.And this is how you break a child, you know. Step one,take the mother away.Chapter FourIn the old culture, there would’ve been rites and rituals for you tocontrol the gates.There were no rites or rituals done to help you control the gates. Youare the jewel at the heart of the lotus.WeAll the madnesses, each and every blinding one, they canall be traced back to the gates. Those carvedmonstrosities, those clay and chalk portals, existingeverywhere and nowhere and all at once. They open,things are born, they close. The opening is easy, a pushingout, an expansion, an inhalation: the dust of divinityreleased into the world. It has to be a temporary channel,though, a thing that is sealed afterward, because the gatesstink of knowledge, they cannot be left swinging wide likea slack mouth, leaking mindlessly. That would contaminatethe human world—bodies are not meant to rememberthings from the other side. There are rules. But these aregods and they move like heated water, so the rules aresoftened and stretched. The gods do not care. It is notthem, after all, that will pay the cost.We were sent through carelessly, with a net ofknowledge snarled around our ankles, not enough to tellus anything, just enough to trip us up. There are manyneglects like this—little gods going mad around you,wandering the beaches with matted hair and swollentesticles. Unrecognizable, laughing through brown teeth asthey grub through rubbish heaps, breasts stretched andgroaning. That’s what it looks like when the flesh doesn’ttake, when you can see them rejecting the graft of reality.But sometimes the flesh takes too well, like those thatcame through the gates and went mad in a much saner,more terrifying way, meeting human cruelty with collidingglee, losing themselves in the stringy red of mortality.They did atrocious and delicious things to torn people, toscreaming and sobbing children: they broke and buriedbodies, they hid in fathers and husbands, in mothers andcousins, they ripped and they used and they were excited.They took it too far. They took it only a god’s length. Forreasons like them, there should be a rule against shovinggodspawn into a flesh-ridden cage. But they pull us, thehumans, they draw us close. They’re so turgid withpotential and yet so empty, with spaces under their skinsand inside their marrow, so much room for us to yawn intoexistence. They can be ridden, marked, anointed, fucked,then, sometimes, left.Forgive us, we sound scattered. We were ejaculated intoan unexpected limbo—too in-between, too god, too human,too halfway spirit bastard. Deity seed, you know. We neverused to be alone, not in Ala’s underworld womb, tucked inwith the others, the brothersisters. Each time we left, wepromised to come back, promised never to stay too long onthe other side, promised to remember. We floatedsmoothly then, like a paste of palm oil, red and thick. Ourmother was the world, even as she is now. But then shechose to answer some man’s prayer and our smoothnesswas interrupted by the grain of his baritone. “Give me adaughter,” he said. “Father Lord, give me a daughter.”Sometimes the only god who hears your prayer is theone who intends to answer it. We have never been able tounderstand why Ala answered this one, this particularrequest, in the crush of thousands of others; why she paidattention to this wrap of words. Perhaps the prayer caughther eye as it slid from Saul’s mouth; perhaps she picked iton a whim, just to remind the world that she was stillthere, the owner of men. Since the corrupters broke hershrines and converted her children, how many of themwere calling her name anymore?We think about this because there has to be a point, apurpose to this, a reason for why we were thrust acrossthe river, screeching and fighting. There must be athought behind this entrapment, our having to endure thisglut of humanity. On this, our mother, Ala, is silent. All weknow is that there was a prayer, that the Ada was theanswer, that our iyi-ụwa was hidden thoroughly in herbody, making her the bridge between this world and ours.The rest is a road that spreads into unknowns. We weresentenced to those yawning gates between worlds, leftwild, growing in all directions but closed. Open gates arelike sores that can’t stop grieving: they infect with space,gaps, widenings. Room where there should be none. Weshould have blended into the Ada when she was born, butinstead there was a stretch of emptiness between us, bitterlike kola, a sweep of nothing. Aspace like that has no placein a mind.We used to be able to ignore it when we slept, but afterwe woke up in the village, our eyes opened and becameswollen worlds with clouds for irises; the pupils, pots withno bottom. We could see everything. When Saachi left, wesaw the way her children reeled, the way the Adaretreated deeper into her head, closer to us. She rootedlike she’d lost her face, snuffling in the particularheartbreak of a little child, crying for her mother to comeback, come back, please just come back. We struggled inresponse, coming alive not just for ourself, but for her. TheAda was so small, so sad. She should never have been leftalone. She came looking for us because she was lookingfor anyone, because she was pursued by space, gray andmalignant, cold as chalk.She even tried to pray. They had been taking her toMass every Sunday, telling her about the christ, the manwho was a man and not. She read stories about how hewould appear to his followers, the faithful ones, and so sheprayed. She asked him to come down and hold her, just fora little bit. It would be easy for him because he was thechrist and it would mean so much to her, so very much,just this little thing, because no one, you see, no one elsewas doing it, holding her. And besides, she loved him andshe was a child, and even if she wasn’t, he would love heranyway, but because she was, then it was extra because heloved the children most of all, so why wouldn’t he justcome down and hold one of them, just for a little bit?We knew him; we knew his name was Yshwa, we knewthat he looked like everyone, all at once, at any time. Hisface could shift like a ghost. It was, we also knew,impossible for him not to hear her. He hears every prayerbabbled screamed sung at him. He does not, contrary tosome belief, often answer them. Yshwa too was born withspread gates, born with a prophesying tongue and handshe brought over from the other side. And while he loveshumans (he was born of one, lived and died as one), whatthey forget is that he loves them as a god does, which is tosay, with a taste for suffering. So he watched the Ada cryherself to sleep with his wrong name and her mother’sheld on her lips. He ran his hands along the curve of herfaith and felt its strength, that it would remain steadfastwhether he came to her or not. And even if it did not hold,Yshwa had no intentions of manifesting. He had enduredthat abomination of the physical once and it was enough,never again. Not for the heartbroken children who weresuffering more than her, not for the world off a cliff, notfor a honey-soaked piece of bread. We resented him for it.When his fingers came too close, we snapped our teeth atthem and Yshwa withdrew, amused, and went back to hiswatching.*We made ourself big and strong for the Ada, we tried to,because she was solidifying into something lost and bereft.We were still very weak, as newborns often are, but wewere determined to spring into sentience, to drag ourselfupright, clawing grips into the sides of her mind. We couldnot have done it if she was not the type of child that shewas, ready to believe in anything.Saul and Saachi had allowed the Ada to have achildhood that was, in a town full of death, unusuallyinnocent. They didn’t believe in interfering with the child’simagination, and so when the Ada finished one of her manybooks and decided that she could talk to animals, no onecorrected her. “It did no harm to let her believe that,” Saulsaid, and the Ada continued to believe wildly, in Yshwa andfairies and pixies living in the flame of the forest blossoms.She believed that the top of the plumeria tree in theirbackyard could be a portal to another world, and that allmagic was stored outside in leaves and bark and grass andflowers. These things that she believed in meant that,although she did not know it yet, she could believe in us.And so we were strengthened, because belief, for beingslike us, is the colostrum of existence. After Saachi left, theAda sank even more into her books, by instinct, separatingherself from this world and disappearing into others. Sheread everywhere: on the toilet, at the dining table, in thelibrary before school assembly each morning. It is notclear how much saving these books were capable of.*Meanwhile, Ala continued to watch her child. After all, theAda was her hatchling, her bloodthirsty little sun, coveredin translucent scales. We were learning that to beembodied was to be the altar and the flesh and the knife.Sometimes the gods just want to see what you are going todo.Let us give you an example. When the Ada wasseventeen, she was living in America, in a small town inthe Appalachian Mountains. Saachi had moved her therefor university and the Ada would have been alone, exceptthat we were with her, we were always with her.One night, we woke up with our body’s heart racing, theair ricocheting with noise. It took us a moment toremember where we were, that we did not live in Abaanymore, that we were somewhere new. Our body waslying on a twin bed in a shared room, and a lean, dark,muscled boy was springing out of it, leaving us alone in hissheets. He answered the frantic knocking at the door andturned on the light, filling the room in yellow. Hisroommate looked over at our body, at the Ada, all the wayfrom his bed against the other wall. He was the color ofbutter and his eyes were sour and hungry. There was anEastern European girl at the door, one of the cross-countryrunners, tight spandex seized to her body. She had beensplashed up and down with generous streaks of blood.Some of it was drying on her face, beside her dilated eyes,and she was telling the dark boy about another runner whohad penetrated a window with his arm. The glass hadpenetrated him back, which explained her lavish coloring.The sour boy jumped down from his bed and we watchedboth of them pull shirts over their carved chests. The Adaslid down too, and we followed them out of the room anddownstairs, our eyes tracing the drops of blood that werescattered down each step, then along the corridor. Therunners kept talking and we slowed down until they hadleft us behind, then we turned and ran back up the stairs—drop drop drop, splatter on the wall—past the room wecame out of, up the next staircase—drop drop, stain. Onthe second step, we found it—a puddle, a pool, a mirror, asmall cloak. Deep like loss.We looked around to make sure that we were alone, thatno one was watching, but it was only the Ada and us andold banisters and worn carpet. We bent our knees and ourbreath was shallow, adrenaline coursing quickly; wereached out the Ada’s hand until our fingertip brushed thesurface of the pool, of the stale, exposed blood with itscalm skin. It was already changing its mind about beingliquid, cooling now that it was no longer merrily bouncingthrough the boy’s blood vessels. We skimmed our fingersacross the tight top of it, then the Ada stood up and wewalked away, away from the terrifying rush of how muchwe wanted more of it, much more.The problem with having gods like us wake up inside ofyou is that our hunger rises as well and someone, you see,has to feed us. Before the university, the Ada had begunthe sacrifices that were necessary to keep us quiet, to stopus from driving her mad. She was only twelve then, andshe sat at the back of her classroom and laid her hand onher desk, her palm flat. “Look,” she said to her classmates,and they turned, vaguely interested. “Look what I can do.”She raised the blade that she had taken from Saul’sshaving supplies, that double-edged song wrapped in waxpaper, and she dropped it on the skin of the back of herhand, in a stroke that whimpered. The skin sighed apartand there was a thin line of white before it blushed intofurious red wetness.She has no memory of her classmates’ faces once thathappened, because we filled her up utterly, expanding inglee, rewarding her for carving herself for us. She wouldspend another twelve years trying to be the torn feathersin a clay doorway, the sting of gin soaking the threshold.At sixteen, breaking a mirror to dig into her flesh with theglass. At twenty, when she was in veterinary school, afterspending long hours separating skin from cadaver muscleand lifting delicate sheets of fascia, she would return toher room and use a fresh scalpel on her scarred left arm.Anything, you see, that would make that pale secret fleshsing that bright mother color.Earlier, when we said she went mad, we lied. She hasalways been sane. It’s just that she was contaminated withus, a godly parasite with many heads, roaring inside themarble room of her mind. Everyone knows the stories ofhungry gods, ignored gods, bitter, scorned, and vengefulgods. First duty, feed your gods. If they live (like we do)inside your body, find a way, get creative, show them thered of your faith, of your flesh; quiet the voices with thelullaby of the altar. It’s not as if you can escape us—wherewould you run to?We had chosen the currency the Ada would pay us withback on the tar of Okigwe Road, in the maw of A uli’s leg,and she paid it quickly. Once there was blood, wesubsided, temporarily sated. None of this had been easyfor us, existing like this, entangled in two worlds. We didnot mean to hurt the Ada, but we had made an oath andour brothersisters were pulling at us, shouting at us tocome back. The gates were all wrong, everything was allwrong, we were not dying yet. But they kept pulling us,they made us scream, and we battered against the Ada’smarble mind until she fed us and that thick red offeringsounded almost like our mother—slowly, slowly, nwerenwayọ, take it slowly.The Ada was just a child when these sacrifices began.She broke skin without fully knowing why; the intricaciesof self-worship were lost on her. She did only what she hadto and thought little of it. But she believed in us. Saachibrought back empty journals from Saudi Arabia and theAda filled them up with blue ink. It was in them that shenamed us, titling us for the first time. Our forms wereyoung and indistinct, but this naming was a second birth,it sorted us into something she could see. The first of us,Smoke, was a complicated gray, swirled layers and depths,barely held together in a vaguely human shape. We liftedour fogged arms, clumsy fingers exploring a blank anddrifting face. The second of us, Shadow, was a deep black,pressed malevolently against a wall, hints of other colors(mother color eyes, yellowed teeth) that never made it pastthe fullness of the night. The Ada made us and continuedto feed us.Blood and belief. This is how the second madnessbegan.Chapter FiveCan you pray into your own ear?WeAfter she named us in that second birth, we felt evencloser to the Ada. This is not normal for beings like us; ourbrothersisters tend to have little or no affiliation to thebodies they pass through. The Ada should have beennothing more than a pawn, a construct of bone and bloodand muscle, a weapon against her mother. But we had aloyalty to her, our little container. If we had been asked totake a piece of chalk and draw where she stops and wherewe start, it would have been hard. We did not know thenhow much of a betrayal this was to our brothersisters.Our third birth happened in Virginia, after the Ada hadmoved to America. There was a song that followed usthere, into the mountains, into the next split. It started inSweden, and then it was flattened into a CD and bought inGermany, packed into the cool of a suitcase and carriedinto the humidity of Nigeria. Lisa unpacked it there andslid it into a CD player in her house in Aba, next door toher father’s hospital where A uli had been operated on.Lisa and the Ada listened to the song over and over again.The singer was a girl called Emilia and her voice wentthrough the air of Lisa’s room like a wing. When the Adamoved, she brought the song in a suitcase and she playedit out loud in Virginia.In another world, our third birth would have happenedin Louisiana, among those swampy spirits, in the mouth ofan alligator. There was a school there that gave the Ada afull scholarship, but Saachi diverted us from that path,swerving to avoid a cemetery, and she sent the Ada toVirginia instead. It was a smaller school, it would bequieter, and she thought the girl would be safer there.When she was making these choices, Saachi had tried tosit down with Saul in their dining room, under the paintingof a grief-eyed christ, to plan the future of their children,which programs they would go to, which countries theywould be lost to. But Saul had turned his back a long timeago—we could have told Saachi that.“Why are you not interested in making college plans forthem?” Saachi asked, hurt and frustration seeping out ofthe cracks in her voice. She wanted to include Saul; shewas tired, ripped from her family, and she wanted him tocare, to help. But Saul was an unforgiving man.“What for?” he said. “I don’t have the money.” It wasinteresting for us to watch, how he didn’t even have to goanywhere in order to leave her.Saachi had been in Saudi for seven years by then—seven years of leaving her children, seven years alone. Inall that time, Saul had never called her. Saachi wouldwatch as the other women she worked with picked up theirphones and broke into smiles at their husbands’ voices,then she would leave quietly and cry to herself in herbedroom, before picking up the phone to call back homebecause she had not forgotten her children were stillthere, sacrificed and sad. She made their university plansalone, moving Chima to Malaysia to stay with her familythere, then returning two years later to collect the Ada.They traveled to America together, stopping over in AddisAbaba. The Ada was excited because she knew Saachialways flew through Ethiopia—it was part of the humanmother’s other life, where she ate grapes reclining onembroidered cushions, acid-washed denim hidden underher abaya by yards of black cloth. When Saachi and theAda flew through Addis, however, they spent only a fewhours in the airport and it meant nothing, it felt likenothing. We were not surprised—many things are like this.The Ada went to Virginia, to the slopes of grass and themarrow-red buildings of the school, heavy doors andcreaking heaters throughout. It was winter when wearrived with Saachi and our body. There is a photograph ofthem, of Saachi and the Ada standing on a gentle inclinewith a church settled behind them and the groundsuffocated in snow. Saachi’s arms are lost in a blackleather jacket and an oatmeal turtleneck wraps her necklike a large fist. Her hand is resting on the Ada’s shoulderand they are both tightening their eyes against the sun.The Ada’s legs stretch out from underneath an oversizedfleece, dull mint green slinking over her wrists, and herhair is sticking out in tufts from under her woolen hat.She is only sixteen, and the way she smiles, you can’ttell we’re in her, that we’re puzzled by the snow and thecold and the damp roaring ocean between us and the redmud we came from, the drifts of white sand, that one palmtree that feels generations old, the one that wavers on theside of the road when you drive down from UbakalaJunction, before you pass all the seven villages, like slidingdown the gullet of our mother, past the screaming gates ofher teeth. It’s not the first time we’ve been away, but it’sthe first time we don’t know when we’re coming back. Wehad no idea then that the song had followed us.It was later, years later, when everything had changed,or before or right around, that the Ada lay in a narrowdorm bed in Hodges Hall next to a boy from Denmark andthey both looked up at the ceiling. It was springtime andthe room was quiet as the boy sang Emilia’s song into thesilence, the first two lines of the chorus. I’m a big big girlin a big big world. The Ada didn’t pause, not a beat, andshe sang the next two lines softly. It’s not a big big thing ifyou leeeaave me. The boy sat up on his elbow, pleasantlysurprised that she knew the song, asking her how, when,where. The Ada smiled at his delight and told him aboutLisa’s house and the pop CD from Germany, and yes, nowwe recall, this was before it all went rotten. It was onlylater, much later, that we discovered the staggeringbreadth of things this boy would do to the Ada.*The first few weeks of America were cold and the snow fellthickly, like it was being shoveled out of the sky. It was theAda’s first winter and she made a snow angel becausethat’s what she’d waited for, to lie with her arms flung andher legs wide, to flap and fly until sainthood spreadbeneath her. Saachi stayed for two weeks before she flewto see Chima, before returning to Saudi, again with astopover in Addis, leaving the Ada more alone than shehad ever been.We felt just like she did, the most alone we couldremember, torn from the place of our first and secondbirths: taken on a plane across an ocean, given no returndate. Let us tell you, our mother’s children began tocherish another great anger against us then. This was aside effect of being in a body, the fact that the humans hada human life. It was inevitable that the Ada would go touniversity, that her life would continue moving in a waythat had nothing to do with us. She was majoring inbiology; she wanted to be a veterinarian because she lovedanimals. We did not care. We were hungry inside her,raging against this useless mortality, as if we could rageright back to the world we came from. We raged at thedisplacement of a new country.After all, were we not ọgbanje? It was an insult to besubject to the decisions made around what was just avessel. To be carried away like cargo, to be deposited inthe land of the corrupters, inside this child simmering withemotions, searching for us because she was uprooted andalone, and we, always we, having to fix it, well, you missyour father—why we don’t know, the man was just a man,and you miss the amen and that yellow girl you used to runaround with, and you have work to do, work to do, and notime to shatter any further, and you hide in a lecture halland cry and cry as if you have something to cry about?Very well, we will do you this one thing, because it wasalways you and us together, and you named us the shadowthat eats things and the smoke that hides the mother colorfrom our teeth, and you have granted us dominion overthis marble room that you call your mind, so here is theplace where you miss that man and the girls and the roadyou used to run down, it is soft and fleshy, a bulb offeeling, and here we are like a useful edge and here is thecut, here is the fall, here is the empty that follows it all.Here is the empty that follows it all.*After that, it was simple; the Ada stopped missing Saul andthe amen and Lisa. We were still angry; gods are notappeased that easily, so we bubbled violently through herarms. She threw lamps and cafeteria cups across the smallroom she shared with a white girl on the honors floor,shattered glass following her like a lost dog. She met theAmerican girls who had come from Miami and Atlanta andChicago, Black girls with slick, straight hair. They flutteredat the state of hers, which was a confused mix of texturesand lengths, thick and awkward. When the Ada was achild, it had been a beast leaping from her scalp andgnawing at her small shoulders. Saachi bought relaxers tosubdue it, to stop it from rising into the sky; not to make itstraight but to calm it down so at least a comb could beteased through. It was washed every Sunday in its fullgreatness, combed through every morning before school,tugged into two plaits while the Ada ate Nasco cornflakesand winced.Saachi was in Saudi the day that they cut it, but shespoke of that day as if she was there, telling everyone howthe Ada cried. In the months before leaving for America,the Ada had let her hair grow back out, braided it intosynthetic twists for her secondary school graduation, thentaken those out before flying to Virginia. The Americangirls sat her down firmly in front of a television andrelaxed her hair, blow-drying and flat-ironing it until it wasdecided and bone-straight. The girl holding the flatironsang along to the advertisements on TV and the Adalaughed, looking up at her sideways.“How do you know all the songs?” she asked.The girl laughed back at her. “Don’t worry,” she said.“By the time you’re here for a while, you’ll be singing allthe commercials too.” She ran a wide-tooth comb throughthe Ada’s hair, admiring how all the curls had gone. Theother girls came to check it out, to give their approval, andthen they took her around to meet the other Black kids oncampus, because the Ada was now one of them, welcometo America. We watched, fascinated. Humans are soritualistic. When they met her, the Black boys sidled up,grinning. Most of them were track runners, tight andalmost feline in how they moved.“Hey girl,” they drawled. “Where you from?”It wasn’t a question we were used to, not yet. “Nigeria,”the Ada replied, smiling politely, wondering if it soundedstrange. We never had to say that when we lived there.“Oh, word? That’s cool.”The girls who were showing her around leaned againstthe walls and flipped their silked-up hair. “Watch outnow,” they said, smirking. “She’s only sixteen.”The Ada watched as the boys visibly recoiled.“Oh, hell no!” they said, drawing out the hell. “We gon’have to wait till you eighteen, shit.”Everyone laughed and the Ada smiled vaguely, but shedidn’t get the joke, not then. After a few weeks with thatcrew, it became clear that the Ada didn’t quite fit. Theydisliked the white equestrians who lived on the honorsfloor with her, and the Ada didn’t know why, not yet.America would teach her that later. When the Black kidsfound out that she listened to Linkin Park, they looked ather like she was a stranger thing than they’d bargainedfor. The Ada drifted away from them and found the otherinternational students instead: the long jumper fromJamaica, the soccer players from Saint Lucia and Ugandaand Kenya, the Dominican cigar-smoking girl, all theothers who didn’t quite fit either. They became her circlefor the rest of her stay in the mountains.Then it was two years later and she was eighteen andher hair was long and decided and bone-straight, fallingpast her shoulders in heavy dark brown. We were stillinside her, but she was much the same as she’d been whenSaachi brought her there and handed her over to thekindly white faculty, except she now knew what everyonemeant by the jokes about her age, she knew what theywere waiting for. The Ada still wore a gold crucifix aroundher neck, a gift from Saachi’s mother, a reminder that shehad kept her childhood crush on the christ. She neverquestioned his decision not to hold her; instead sheconstantly asked him for forgiveness as she tried to beworthy of his love. There had been the Panamanian boywhen she was sixteen (sixteen and a half, she’d corrected,and he looked at her like she was a child), the darkmuscled boy from Canarsie who ate no meat and taughther how to twist his dreadlocks and braid them, theassistant track coach from Colombia, the embarrassingcrushes (the man from admissions, the skinny Trini boywho ran like wind on the pitch)—all just kisses, no one hadtouched her lower than the indent of her navel.We kept her neutral. It was strange; it had been strangeeven when we were home (back across the ocean, wherewe belonged). There was one day when Lisa had come outfrom her boyfriend’s room and told the Ada about thesplash of white that colored his trousers from the inside,and our body just arranged her face the way it wassupposed to look, as if she understood the secrets of hotteenage fumblings or the appeal of shiny condoms. Sheknew, logically, but we kept her neutral. It was not meantfor her, the heat rising, the tricks of the body, thecompulsions of flesh. She turned eighteen and nothinghappened. We kept her. They watched her move in herinnocence, a golden chained thing, dancing on dim dancefloors and bright stages, winding circles with her waist asif she’d done so on a body before. She tried to hide it,flirting and kissing as if she had fire inside rather than us.All those boys, all that empty following it all. We kept her,we held her, she was ours.There was a Serbian boy with clear brown eyes who wasdifferent, who mattered to the Ada very much. His namewas Luka and he was on the tennis team. He lived in thehouse down the hill and had dark hair, even on the gap ofhis chest that showed through his shirts and on hisforearms and calves. Luka knew the Ada enough to seewhen the blood rose to a blush through her brown skin andhe had been a safe place, a port, a boy who called the Adamagic and wanted more than the friendship she offered.He stopped when she chose someone else, later,afterward, when she had no safe places outside heranymore.The Ada used to go to Luka’s house down the hill, wheretheir friends drank to prepare for the night out, rollingjoints and snorting quick lines of coke. The house was fullof volleyball players, tall Europeans who were sweet,affectionate, open.“Come to Iceland,” Axel said, his blond hair falling overhis beautiful cheekbones, bending down to forgive hisheight. “Come and see the northern lights, they’rewonderful.”A year later, he would climb up a fire escape, rumpledand handsome in a linen suit, to kiss her, and she would besad because he was so carelessly lovely but everything wastoo late. But then, back then, he was bright and drunk andhigh, and he and his best friend, the Slovakian, Denis,played Pac-Man with mad concentration. Together withLuka, they were that house that drew everyone in, thecenter. She liked them, she liked being around them,because when she came over, they already knew she didn’tdrink or smoke, and so they played music she likedinstead, with horns blasting, and we would dance insideher like those days when we used to dance with Saachibefore she birthed our cage. We danced through her body,our body, the one that had been built so carefully for us,now winding through the rooms, her hands swirling in theair, the music repeating as the boys played it for as long asshe wanted, the only fix they could offer, the only oneshe’d take.We were distinct in her head by then: we had beenSmoke and Shadow since the naming, since the secondbirth, little nagging parts that the Ada tried to ignore, thatshe sometimes argued with but didn’t tell anyone about.She just went down the hill, danced until her long hairsmelled of smoke or until everyone left for Gilligan’s,where she’d been going before she was legal because theclub took college IDs as if they were real, as if everyonestarted college at eighteen. It was at the house down thehill that she met the boy who would sing the Emilia song afew months afterward. His name was Soren. He was one ofthe volleyball players, Danish according to his passport,Eritrean according to his blood, a skinny boy with pools foreyes and dark spilling smooth on his skin. We noticed him.He noticed the Ada because she didn’t drink, didn’t smoke,only danced, and there was something in her, somethinghe wanted to put his fingers on. He walked beside her asthey all left the house in a rowdy crowd.“Do you smoke?” he asked, to be sure.She thought he meant cigarettes. So did we. “No,” sheanswered.He’d meant weed, but he liked her answer. They dancedtogether in the smoke of Gilligan’s that night, slowly. Theclub was named after a TV show that she’d never seen,very plastic and Hawaiian, with fake parrots and violentlycolorful drinks. The first time the Ada went there, she’dstared in shock at the way people ground against eachother, ass to crotch, lost in smoke; she’d stared at thedangerous fall of jeans lower than hips, at the badbehavior of it all. They always played “Sandstorm” and,later, at the end of the night, “New York, New York” as akind of dramatic finale. By her last semester, the Adawould be up on that stage, arms around a line of strangewhite girls, kicking her legs up to Frank Sinatra’s hymn toManhattan and dreaming of the day she’d live there.But that night, beer was slippery under their feet asSoren touched his lips to the angles of her hand and thecurve of her neck. He had the fullest eyes she had everseen, so she let him come back to her dorm room with her.The Ada lived alone then, as a resident assistant, so shecould smash mirrors and make carpets of fine glass inpeace and quiet. She could feed us with cuts withouthaving to explain or having people think something waswrong with her. That night, she brought him into her roomand they kissed and fell asleep. Soren returned every dayafter that.He cried a lot, that boy, with those doe-dark eyes of his.The Ada pretended not to hear, but we listened intently ashe huddled against the white brick wall and sobbed intothe night, dreams driving him away from sleep. In the day,he couldn’t stand to be apart from her for too long. Heheld her constantly (we liked that). One day, when theywere getting breakfast in the cafeteria, the Ada filled herplate with six hard-boiled eggs and brought them to thetable.“Don’t eat that,” Soren said. “It’s too many eggs.”She stared at him and laughed, then started crackingthe eggs against each other, point to point, like gladiators.Whichever broke first got eaten. The winner survived tillthe next round.Soren stared at her, his face blank. “I said, you can’t eatthat.” He didn’t raise his voice.The Ada frowned at him and ate her eggs, curious aboutthe harm she could smell in his gentleness, surprised thathe thought he could command her. He said nothing moreand ate his breakfast, his smooth face moody, his slimshoulders curved over his plate. The next day, he calledher his girlfriend.“Wait, really?” she replied. “I didn’t know that.” Heranswer made him angry, which irritated her.“How can you not know that? What do you think we’vebeen doing?” he asked.“How am I supposed to know if you’re just now tellingme?” the Ada replied, but Soren stayed angry.That was the first thing that made us interested in him—his anger. His rich, thick blood sap anger. His nightmarechildhood trauma anger. His I was taken when I was littleand the men kept me in a dirty, small room and they neverfound the other child anger. You could taste the sharpsting of it, the salty frantic colors it had. He was angry thatthe Ada didn’t know she was his girlfriend; he was angrybecause she performed indifference, telling him he couldend it if he wanted to, he could leave if he wanted to. Hewas angry when she suggested he wasn’t over his exgirlfriend,angry when she tried to walk out of theirarguments, angry when she ran and hid in a basement toget away from him.We were fascinated by the ease with which he slippedinto his rages, how much he looked like a little boy whenhe stormed off down the hallway, his slippers thick andplastic and slapping against the carpeting. None of it reallytouched us. The Ada was performing other things, actingthe role of a normal girl in college, selling kisses in orderto be held. She had many conversations with her christ,always one-sided, trying to decipher what he wanted. Theabstinence was easy for her; she had always beeninterested in sex only from odd, indirect angles, readingthe Bible for perversions, trying to learn all the words, allthe pieces of it that only fit in the mind. Her body, ourbody, was indifferent. When the other girls talked abouttheir lusts, she listened curiously to these hungers shedidn’t have, a need neither she nor we understood. WhenSoren tried to fuck her, she did not understand. We didn’tunderstand either. We were only interested in his pain.He was full of shame and apologies when she said no.The Ada smiled and explained her vow to the christ,explained how important it was to her while fingering thegold crucifix around her neck. Her grandmother onSaachi’s side would have been proud. After that, the Adawatched with a mild interest when Soren slid his penisbetween her breasts. She found herself still watching asshe moved into his dorm room for the May term, stillwatching when he raged about his father, when hepunched the walls till his hands swelled. We watched withher, observing this furious human and his hungers. Oneevening, Soren stood up from the bed and looked down atour body.“You need to get birth control pills.” His voice was calm,a pool of quietly congealing blood with a skin forming.The Ada didn’t understand. She blinked and there was apause, a teetering moment. She had no idea what he wastalking about. Then slowly, information started filteringthrough, edged with alarm. Plain details at first, like it wasafternoon and the trees outside the window were green inthe sunlight. Like he was naked but she had no idea whatshe was wearing. Like his penis was out and it was brownlike his eyes. Like how she didn’t remember takinganything off or putting anything on. He pulled on a pair ofshorts as she sat in the cheap Wal-Mart sheets, knowledgetrickling like warm urine into her head, traveling down toher chilled hands. The words swirled in nausea around her.Birth control pills, because this boy, this boy with the doeeyes and the sad skin, had released clouds into her. Butshe couldn’t remember any of it and she couldn’tremember saying yes because she couldn’t rememberbeing asked.She was confused. There had been so many refusals inthe weeks before, piled up like small red bricks, the weightof an apartment building that got torn down, things shethought would be heavy enough to hold him away becausehe knew, he knew, he knew she didn’t want to. Shecouldn’t remember anything, like was this the first time,was it the fifth, oh god, how long had he been movingunwanted parts of himself in her? The rush of unknownspropelled the Ada out of the bed and she slid her feet intosneakers and laced them up as fast as she could. Her burstof motion alarmed Soren; he hated when she left, so hegrabbed her arms, forcing her to stay, shouting words,more words than she could listen to. She moved blindlyagainst him, thinking only of the door, of away. He wantedher to say something, so he kept shouting. The Ada openedher mouth and all that poured out were large shapes ofpain that flooded the air as her legs gave out. Shecrumpled to the floor and he dropped down with her. Theysat together in shambled sheets as he shouted blank wordsat her.She started to scream. She screamed and screamed andscreamed. Her vision was numb. There was a window infront of her but it opened into a nothingness like the oneyawning from her mouth. Somewhere she could hear abuilding sound, a wind, huge and wide, rushing out of thevoid, rushing toward her. The walls, the veils in her head,they tore, they ripped, they collapsed. The wind rushedover his empty voice and the Ada thought with a suddenfinal clarity—She has come. She has come for me at last.ASỤGHARAChapter SixỌbịara egbum, gbuo onwe ya.AsụgharaOf course I came. Why wouldn’t I? Let me tell you, Adameant every world to me. But I can’t lie; this third birth ofa thing was a shock. I had been there, just minding myown business as part of a shifting cloud, then the nextthing I knew, I was condensing into the marble room ofAda’s mind, with time moving slower for me than for her.The first thing I did was step forward so I could seethrough her eyes. There was a window in front of her faceand one useless boy beside her. It was cold. I lookedaround the marble for Ada and there she was, a shred inthe corner, a gibbering baby. I didn’t touch her—thatwasn’t my style. I’ve never been the comforting type.Instead I sank my roots into her body, finding my grip onher capillaries and organs. I already knew that Ada wasmine: mine to move and take and save. I stood her bodyup. The boy was crying and angry, still sitting on the floor.“Go then!” he said, sulking. “Go!”I made Ada pick up his jacket, and then she and Iwalked outside. Once we were away from him, I releasedher and focused on the rush of being here. I felt drunk andfull of life; it flooded the pockets of my cheeks. I was a me!I had a self! I spun in the marble, giddy and ecstatic atexistence, before remembering the reason I’d arrived. Iswung around to check on Ada.She was stumbling in front of Hodges Hall, dialing thephone number of one of her friends, an older Nigerian girlcalled Itohan, who lived in Georgia. I listened becausehonestly, it was just fascinating to have ears, to hear howAda’s voice reverberated inside her skull. She was sobbingas she told Itohan what happened, or at least what shecould remember of what happened. I didn’t interfere untilItohan told Ada to pray, that their God would forgive her.That didn’t even make sense to me. Forgive her for what? Islid in gently and made Ada end the call. I could alreadysee that she was clearly better off with just me.Ada ran her arms through the bushes under the boy’swindow and the thorns scratched her skin bloody. Shewept. I didn’t mind the bleeding; it made me feel good, justlike it always had, back when I was only a drift in theshifting cloud of the rest of us, floating through her. Shewalked across the road, over a small green hill, wherethere was a church and a graveyard. In the center of thegraveyard, there was a cross that was seven feet tall. Adawrapped her bleeding arms in the boy’s jacket and lay onthe concrete base, staring up into the sky as she criedsome more. I lay down there with her, stretching throughher. I wondered if she could feel that she wasn’t alone. Herthoughts were translucent streams fogging up the marble—how she had disappointed her christ, how she wouldn’tbe able to pray again, not now, not ever. She knew whatshe was supposed to do—forgive herself for fucking andtalk to the christ—except that she couldn’t do either andshe didn’t think it mattered; she didn’t think she wasworth for-giving anyway. I watched her thoughts andfrowned. She seemed very lonely. Poor thing, I thought, tobe so in love with this christ. Why disturb herself with himif it was giving her so much pain?But I liked her other choices, like the graveyard and thedrying blood on her arms. Ada stayed there until the sunset, then I moved her to the house down the hill. Sheseemed to have good memories of that place and herfriend there, Luka. He had left for the summer so his roomwas empty. It still smelled like him, though, and it felt likea safe place for Ada, so she hid in it. But the boy, Soren, hecame looking for her there. It was something I was goingto have to teach her, that there were no safe places left.He was angry that Ada had disappeared and furiouswhen he saw the crusted scratches on her forearms. Hetook her back to his room, and the wounds on her armsdidn’t stop him, the memory of her sitting in the sheetsand screaming didn’t stop him. No, the boy fucked herbody again, that day and every day afterward, over andover. He would look into her eyes and swear in time withhis thrusts as he fucked her, never bothering with acondom, always coming inside her.“I fucking love you. You have no idea how much Ifucking love you.”Except Ada wasn’t there anymore. At all, at all. Shewasn’t even a small thing curled up in the corner of hermarble. There was only me. I expanded against the walls,filling it up and blocking her out completely. She wasgone. She might as well have been dead. I was powerfuland I was mad, he could not touch me no matter how hardhe pushed into her body, he could definitely never touchher. I was here. I was everything. I was everywhere. Andso I smiled at him, using only Ada’s mouth and teeth.“You love this,” I corrected. “You love fucking me.”He got angry again. The boy was so predictable, so easyto provoke. Human beings are useless like that. I likedmaking him angry, sha. I would hold him with Ada’s armsand smile in the dark while he cried after his nightmares.It was good that he lived with pain. Ada was never therewhen there was a bed. If I made sure of anything in myshort life till then, I made sure of that.When she had to go and get a pregnancy test, the firstof many, Ada called a taxi from the clinic and took it backto campus. The driver was a biker. She could tell becausehe had Harley-Davidson stickers everywhere. Theyreminded me of the other taxi, the one Ada’s mother tookin another lifetime, when we were both born. I was fond ofstickers in taxis, so I said, with Ada’s mouth, “I lovemotorcycles.”“You should give me a call,” the driver replied. “I’ll takeyou out on my bike one day.” He gave Ada his card. Theboy lost his temper when he found out and ripped the cardinto pieces. A few days later, he found Ada out back behindthe dorm, weighing a broadsword with both hands, lookingat knives that one of her collector friends had brought overin his truck. The boy got angry and banned Ada from everplaying with blades again. Ada looked at him and I staredthrough her eyes and kept her silent. She and I watchedhis anger bounce around and we did nothing, said nothing.What was there to say? It was more interesting to watchhis fury grow at the dullness in Ada’s eyes, the smoothemptiness of her face. It is not easy to look at me, I knowthis very well.When Ada first met the boy, he told her this story abouthow much he loved his mother, how he and his brotherwent and drove nails through the hands of a man whothrew stones at her in Denmark. I remembered it when Iarrived. The image of the man being held against theground, his palm forced open, the boys baring their teeth.The nail tearing through flesh and ligaments with metalpurpose, the man’s screams, the blood bursting. It wastrue, and me, I like true things. Yet, when Ada started tothink that she loved the boy, I allowed it. It would makethings easier for her. She was not like me; she was notstrong. One time, the boy was leaving for a volleyballtournament and Ada held her hand to his face as they saidgood-bye. I watched through her eyes as his smile wentaway.“Stop it,” he told her. “My mother looks at me like that.”She must have been in front of me that time. I neverlooked at him with anything that could have beencontained in his mother’s face. The boy made Ada agibbering thing in a corner—this is the truth, but he wouldnever get her again. I had arrived, flesh from flesh, trueblood from true blood. I was the wildness under the skin,the skin into a weapon, the weapon over the flesh. I washere. No one would ever touch her again.*When the May term ended, Ada left her school and thatlittle run-down town in the pretty mountains, and flew toGeorgia to stay with Itohan. Soren flew to Denmark, but hetook her teddy bear, Hershey, with him. If you didn’t knowhim, you could call that cute, but he was such a thief, youknow, he stole and stole and stole. Fucking bastard. InGeorgia, Itohan took Ada to a hair salon. Ada sat in one ofthe raised chairs and stared at her reflection, all thatheavy hair hanging from her scalp.“Cut it off,” she said.The stylists, even the other clients, were appalled. Theywere Black women who paid and took money to get andgive long hair, thick hair, straight hair, and she had itpouring from her head like an afterthought.“All that pretty hair?” they asked, horrified. “You sure?”“I’m sure,” Ada said. Of course she was sure. I was sure.Me, I remembered when Ada had been born, with wet hairthat was black as jet and slick as a fish. The hair she hadnow was dead, deader than hair usually is. Besides, I hadarrived and something had to mark that, so cutting herhair felt correct.“Make the first cut then,” the stylist said. She didn’tbelieve Ada would do it, but she didn’t know her and shecertainly didn’t know us.Ada took the scissors from her, took a piece of hair fromright above her forehead, pulled it down before her eyes,and snipped near the roots. The women in the roomgasped, staring in shock. I grinned—shebi I told you thegirl belonged to me now. Ada dropped the hair into herlap, on the smock they had put around her neck.“Can you cut the rest, please?” she said.The stylist shook her head and took the scissors fromher. When she finished, Ada asked for her eyebrows to bewaxed, and then she walked out of the salon, looking morelike me. She was about to turn nineteen. Back at Itohan’sapartment, she called another boy in Virginia, the brotherof a friend, who’d arrived from Togo the semester beforewith a starched wide shirt collar that made Ada think ofhome. He and Ada had been flirting for hours each day,ever since the summer started. There were a few dayswhen he wouldn’t take her calls, after she told him aboutSoren, that she had a boyfriend. I grimaced when she saidthat, but I had promised to let her hold her lies if theywould keep her sane. After a while, the brother called herand said it didn’t matter. Somehow, that made it easier.Ada called Soren and told him she was breaking up withhim. I stood heavy in her bones when she did it. The boywas so boring in his sobbing anger, I had her hang up onhim. Ada never got her teddy bear back. I told you he wasa thief.After Georgia, the Ada went to see Saachi, who wassofter in the body now. The human mother had moved toAmerica the year before. She stopped in Nigeria first tocollect A uli, then they went to America and rented a smallapartment in a town in the Southwest. Saachi had wantedSaul to come because he could get his green card, but oldfailures in London meant he wouldn’t be able to practicemedicine in America, so the man refused.“What am I going there to do? To go and sell popcorn?”he said.“And what’s wrong with that?” Saachi had replied. Shedidn’t believe in pride when it came to Ada and the others.But Saul was the way he had always been, so Saachi andA uli moved without him. The two of them lived in the onebedroomspace and A uli slept on a futon in a small roomwith no door, next to the kitchenette. When Ada came tovisit, she slept on the sofa in the living room. One morning,she woke up and Saachi was standing in the kitchenette,looking at her. She was holding a cup of coffee and Adaknew it would be black, just like she knew all of Saachi’sglasses of Coke would be laced with Bacardi. Many thingswere always the same.“When you sleep,” Saachi said, as if it was nothing, “youlook exactly how you did as a child. Exactly.”Ada rubbed her eyes, and when she opened them again,Saachi had walked out of the room and she was alone.They had argued about Ada’s haircut when she first gotthere, and Saachi had left Bible verses in the bathroom onPost-it notes, about how a woman’s hair was her crown. Ihad Ada ignore the notes. She was still getting used tomoving with me; I was heavy and I made her different, ormaybe he had made her different, but either way, nothingwas the same. Saachi watched her like she always had,ever since Ada was a fat baby with a protective pottu onher forehead.“You used to smile,” Saachi said. “You were such ahappy child. Why are you not eating?”This was actually true, but the not eating was just anexperiment I was doing, to see how close to the bone Icould get Ada down to. She had started restricting byherself before I showed up, for some human reason,probably trying to control her body since she couldn’tcontrol her mind. It’s not important. The point is once Iwas there, I took her to new weightless places. 118pounds. She ran every day for an hour. I had her eat onlysalads. Hunger grabbed her from the inside, intimately. Itfelt like it had a purpose, like it was doing something. Adalifted dumbbells and continued running. One day, just likethat, she dropped down to 114 pounds of human flesh. Letme tell you, I’ve never almost flown that well since. Ada’sshoulders became knives in her back, and her legs lookedeven longer than when she took ballet in her first semesterand the instructor told her she’d need XL tights becauseher legs were that long. But yes, no, she was not eating. Itwasn’t important anymore, what happened to her body,not since I was there.I appreciated it, of course—embodiment was luxurious,at least at first. I felt a new power, a flood of greatnessthat yes, Ada would regret later, valid, but for now it wasgood, rich; it meant I was an I, like I and I, like I wasn’tgoing back to that larger we. Ha! How can? No, I was free.I had elevated, transcended, in fact. Risen like steam untilit was me standing in the field of Ada’s body. She namedme this name, Asụghara, complete with that gritty slide ofthe throat halfway through. I hope it scrapes your mouthbloody to say it. When you name something, it comes intoexistence—did you know that? There is strength there,bone-white power injected in a rush, like a trembling drug.Wait, is this how humans feel? To know that you areseparate and special, to be individual and distinct? It’samazing. But I had to remind myself that I wasn’t humanor flesh. I was just a self, a little beast, if you like, lockedinside Ada. Still, it was nice to be able to move her bodyand feel things. When I came in front, I moved like thosemasquerades from her childhood, with meat layered infront of my spirit face.All I’m saying is, it was good to walk in the world.I never forgot Virginia or the boy Soren—the place andperson who midwifed me here. I also didn’t forget that Adawas Ala’s child. It would be too careless to forgetsomething like that. If you are a python’s child, then youare also a python—simple. There should have been aregular molting that came with that, but I was not regular.I wasn’t allowed some gentle and slow shrugging off ofskin. No, my own was to tear it away as soon as I camethrough, splitting it into pieces that were never found,coming out damp with blood. This is what happens whenyou act as if a human can hold godmatter without itcurdling.Ada loved me, sha. She loved me because I hated thatboy. She loved me because I was reckless; I had noconscience, no sympathy, no pity. She loved me because Iwas strong and I held her together. I loved her becauseme, I had known her since I was nothing, since I waseverything, since that shell-blue house in Umuahia. I lovedher because I watched her grow up, because she gaveofferings since I started awakening, feeding me from thecrook of her arm and the skin of her thighs. Let me tell younow, I loved her because in the moment of her devastation,the moment she lost her mind, that girl reached for me sohard that she went completely mad, and I loved herbecause when I flooded through, she spread herself openand took me in without hesitation, bawling and broken, sheabsorbed me fiercely, all the way; she denied me nothing.I loved her because she gave me a name.Chapter Seven[The ọgbanje are] creatures of God with powers over mortals…. Theyare not subject to the laws of justice and have no moral scruples,causing harm without justification.—C. Chukwuemeka Mbaegbu,The Ultimate Being in Igbo OntologyAsụgharaAfter those days and nights of the boy fucking Ada’s body,that summer in Georgia was my first embodied one, when Ihad Ada cut her hair in the sticky heat and wet air. Adahad gone down to stay with Itohan and her family like shealways did every summer. Itohan’s father used to workwith Saachi, at the military hospitals they both got postedto. When Ada moved to America, Saachi asked if his familyin Georgia could host Ada because she had nowhere elseto go. It was too expensive to fly back to Nigeria andSaachi was still living overseas. Itohan’s family agreed,and so Ada flew down and turned seventeen in their house.The mother and brothers lived out in the suburbs whileItohan, who Ada called her big sister, lived in anapartment complex that was more central, with hedgesoutside, carpet inside, and humidity pouring through thewalls. I’m saying all of this to explain that these peoplewere like family to Ada, so that when I tell you the kind ofthings I did after I arrived, you can understand the level ofdamage I caused.I don’t regret any of it, sha. I did what made me happy,whatever filled me up inside. I even remember one time,before I arrived, when Ada was talking to some friends inVirginia and she said, “You know, I’m glad that I haven’tstarted having sex yet.”Her friends had laughed. “How come?” they asked, andAda shrugged.“It’s just that if I start, I know how I’ll get,” she said. It’slike she knew what kind of hunger I would arrive with, theway I would release it on an unprepared world if I evermade it past the veil. I don’t know if she would have everlet me out, or if she had, if that would have been me, orsomething else. But I came into the world the way I didbecause of Soren, and whatever chance I had of beinganything else was lost in that. I was a child of trauma; mybirth was on top of a scream and I was baptized in blood.By the time Ada brought me to Georgia, I was ready toconsume everything I touched.I started with Itohan’s younger brother. He was tall andbeautiful, with smooth dark skin wrapped over muscle, butmore importantly, he was there and it was easy. This wasthe first lesson I had learned from the third birth, abouthuman men. I knew what they valued, I knew where theywanted to be, and I knew what price they would pay for asmall death. So I fucked him on the short carpet ofItohan’s apartment, a few feet away from the kitchenettewhere Ada ate frozen Tampico that she had mashed up in aplastic cup. I could almost see her standing aside as I usedher body, stabbing the orange cubes with a metalteaspoon, the taste bringing Nigeria back into her mouth,memories of Fan-Orange she used to buy from the yogurtvendors who rode bicycles past her secondary school. Ididn’t care about her nostalgia; I had only been a seedthen, it was a different world. My world now was the boyabove and beneath me. I fucked him in the suburbs on theplain sheets of his bed, running Ada’s fingernails down thetightness of his chest and stomach, amazed at how hecould come and still stay hard. He snuck into the guestroom of his mother’s house to fuck me, where I cracked myhips open and faced away from him, and that was the onlytime I came.Ada was never there. I had already promised; she wouldnever be there, not again. It was my job to protect her. ButI liked Itohan’s brother, and I liked choosing a body for thefirst time. Soren didn’t count—no one chose him. So I usedAda’s face and practiced smiles on it, and to my surprise,Itohan’s family couldn’t tell the difference. I was that good.It’s not difficult to pretend to be someone you’ve beenwatching since she was born, but I was a little insulted tobe mistaken for Ada. She was so gullible: she went andthrew herself right into the arms of people who broke her;she would see danger and instead of avoiding it like aperson with sense, she would walk behind its teeth. As ifshe would be safe. As if her childhood shouldn’t havetaught her better. I refuse to believe that I looked anythinglike her—it must have been the humans who just couldn’ttell the difference. Me, I made my mouth as red as silk, Iturned my eyes black, and I made sure no one could trickme. When I did cruel things, I did them with my eyes open.I’ve never been ashamed—I always looked at myselfwithout blinking. But as much as Ada loved me, sheavoided meeting my gaze. We would both materialize inher mind, the marble room, cool veined white walls andfloors, and she would look away. It was understandable: Ihad arrived and I was so deep inside her, locked into herflesh, moving her muscles. Suddenly she had to share withsomething she couldn’t control. I understood, but at thesame time, it wasn’t my problem.I was selfish back then. You can’t really blame me—itwas my first time having a body. Humans don’t rememberthe time before they had bodies, so they take things forgranted, but I didn’t. I remembered not being myself, justbeing a piece of a cloud. I was careless with her body, sha,not thinking about the responsibilities of having flesh.Consequences were a thing that happened to humans, notto me. This was their world. I wasn’t even really here. It’sno excuse—I know I wasn’t fair to Ada—but it was still areason.The first few times with Itohan’s brother, he didn’t weara condom. When Ada brought it up, he was reluctant, hedidn’t want to go and buy them.“Why on earth not?” Ada asked.He looked uncomfortable. “If I buy them then it’s like Iknow I’m going to sin, like I’m planning to go and havesex.”Ada stared at him. Inside her head, in the marble room,I came up and stood at her shoulder. We were thinking theexact same thing, and in that moment, it pulled ustogether, rippling electric.I leaned over and spoke to her. “That’s the stupidestthing I’ve ever heard.”She forgot to ignore me this time. “Be quiet. You knowhow religious they are.”“But it doesn’t make any sense! He knows he’s going todo it, so why is he pretending?” I asked, even though Ialready knew the answer. He was only a human—what elsecould I expect, realistically? He wanted to pretend he wassomehow better than he knew he was; he wasn’t ready tothrow himself into sin. Humans find it easier to just lie andlie to themselves.Ada made him get the condoms anyway, and he told herhow awkward it had been when the cashier asked himwhat size he needed. I watched him tell the story, hismouth split into a shy smile through full lips, and I listenedto Ada say whatever she was saying to him. Honestlyspeaking, I didn’t care about the condoms, but then again,it wasn’t my body. I should’ve cared, though, at least forAda’s sake.What I cared about was that he felt good. Or maybe notgood, but he made me feel full. He was thick and hestretched deep inside Ada, against the oath’s velveteen,pushing her body open in a way that seemed to say, withconfidence, you are alive and you have not died. For me,that was enough. Alive was flesh. Alive meant I had a bodyto move with.Ada went with him to Planned Parenthood twice to getthe morning-after pill, even after he bought the condoms.You see, she was the one who insisted on protection, butshe was never the one he slept with—I was. On theirsecond visit to the clinic, the nurse there looked at Adawith contempt.“Maybe try using contraception?” she said, and hersarcasm brought blood rushing to Ada’s cheeks.“Don’t mind her,” I whispered to Ada, looking back atthe woman with hatred. “Who is she, sef? Stupid bitch.”She’s just a fucking human, I almost added, she doesn’teven matter, none of this matters. Still, I didn’t let Ada goback to the clinic after that, not even when it would havebeen the smart thing to do. There are many things I did toprotect her and there are many ways in which I failed.*I continued to sleep with Itohan’s brother, and onemorning back at their mother’s house in the suburbs, thesun was breaking like thin water through the windowwhen Itohan’s mother walked into the room and caughtAda lying inside the curve of the boy’s long body. Theywere both wearing clothes—it was actually innocent, notlike the night when Ada had been sleeping on the sofa inthe upstairs parlor, when he held his penis to her face,thick and partial, bumping into her nose and nudging herlips apart. I had overtaken her before she woke up fully,moving quickly so I could push back the first wave ofterror and disgust that was breaking in her. This was mine.He was mine. I had promised her, never again.When his mother opened the door, Ada and the boystartled awake just in time to catch her firm gaze sweepingover them.“Come to my room,” she told her son, and shut the doorwith a sharp click.Ada’s stomach dropped. I stretched inside her andlooked around lazily.“Oh fuck,” she said, sitting up. “Should I go also?”“Shit.” Itohan’s brother leaped off the bed and pulled ona T-shirt. His face was twisted with worry. “Just stay here.I’m coming.”He left the room, carefully closing the door behind himas if someone else might walk past and see Ada in hissheets. I sat with her, excitement thudding through me. Itwas so bad, being caught. I loved it.“What’s going to happen?” Ada asked me, chewing onthe corner of her thumb. “What if she finds out?”I thought about it. “Well, what’s the worst that couldhappen?”“Don’t be stupid,” she said. “You know what willhappen.”She was right. If Itohan’s mother found out I had beenfucking her third child under her roof, Ada wouldn’t bewelcome there anymore. Their family had wrapped her upas if she had a right to feel safe with them, and if thissecret was discovered, she would lose them all.“Don’t worry,” I told Ada. “She didn’t see anything.”Ada wrapped her arm over her stomach. She waswearing an old oversized T-shirt, green with large colorfulbutterflies all over, a souvenir from the Philippines thatSaachi had given her. She also wasn’t really listening tome, not anymore; she was too afraid. I sat with heranyway, until the boy came back into the room lookingchastened.“She wants to talk to you,” he said.“What?!” Ada clambered off the bed. “For what? Whatdid she say to you?”He shrugged uncomfortably, not wanting to explainmore. “Just go,” he said. “She’s waiting for you.”By then, even I had become cautious, although the thrillof being bad still hummed quietly in me. Ada walked downthe short hallway and knocked on his mother’s bedroomdoor, pushing it open when the woman’s voice told her tocome in. She had never been inside that room before. Itwas shadowed and Itohan’s mother was sitting on the edgeof her bed with a Bible lying next to her on the duvet.When she spoke, her voice was firm but not angry.“I’ve seen you two cuddling on the couch before, andthat one is fine,” she said. “I know you weren’t doinganything, but you should never share a bed with a manunless you are wearing his ring. Not even your ownbrother.”Ada kept a scared and straight face, but I caught herrelief and broke out in rib-tearing laughter inside her.“She doesn’t know! I can’t believe she doesn’t know,” Igasped. “Fuck!”“Shut up,” hissed Ada, her mouth closed.The woman continued talking and my laughter turnedbitter at how blind she was. So much had changed. Somuch had changed, and if this had happened six monthsbefore … but that wasn’t even possible. Six months before,Ada would never have been in Soren’s bed, I wouldn’t havebeen born, and Ada would still be the sweet and good girlwho this mother thought she was talking to. But I was herenow and I was the world, lying in ugly entrails. I envied hismother the cleanliness she lived in, where everything wasstill innocent and no one had ever touched Ada. It wassuch a fucking lie.After she released Ada from her room, Ada went back tothe boy’s bedroom, but she made sure to leave his dooropen. He was leaning against his wardrobe, lookingbeautiful and stressed out.“I hate lying to my mother,” he said.Ada made a face and put her hand on his arm. “I know,”she replied, and she meant it. She hated dishonesty andshe knew what loving a mother felt like. Me, I rolled myeyes at the both of them.“He can hate what he wants,” I told her. “You know heloves fucking us. It’s not as if he’s going to stop. Theynever stop.”“You mean he loves fucking you,” she whispered back,and I made a rough sound. She was right. I was stayingbehind her face like a good little spirit, sha, like a smallbeast on a leash. When the boy drove us to church, Adastood up in the car to stick her head out of the sunroof andfeel the wind rocketing against her face.“Come inside the car,” he scolded.She looked down at his face and sat back in her seat.“What’s the problem?”He stared straight ahead, through the windshield, hisface set. “My girlfriend won’t do things like that.”Ada raised her eyebrows and I snorted inside her head,but neither of us said anything. After the service, Adaheaded toward the other car to return to the house withthe rest of the family—the boy had to run some errands.“You people, take care of my wife,” he called out to hismother and his sister and his older brother. His voicecarried over the green lawn and he was smiling like thesun, and everyone laughed fondly as Ada blushed.After I had Ada cut off her hair, the boy wasdisapproving, but he still prayed with Ada when hedropped her off at the airport because he had somehowbecome her boyfriend. When he prayed, Ada held hishands, closed her eyes, and pretended as if she could feelYshwa anywhere close to her. She couldn’t, of course, notanymore, but I was helping her get better at lying.After her visit with Saachi, Ada flew back to Virginia forher final year at the university. On her first day back, shewalked through the cafeteria and set her tray down on atable. One of her friends on the track team slid in next toher, flipping a ponytail over her shoulder.“Hey, Ada. How was your summer?”Ada shrugged. “It was cool. Went to Georgia, visited mymother, had sex. You know, the usual.”Her friend shrieked. Everyone knew Ada had never beentouched like that before. “Girl, what?! You got laid?”Ada smiled and they both dissolved into laughter.Her friend was nodding and proud. “Yo, when I saw youwalking across the room, I could tell, you know? I said,‘Yeah, she’s walking different.’”I wondered if that was true. Was I showing that much onthe outside? Had I entered Ada’s walk, the way she movedher head, her smile? She kept stretching her mouth andlaughing with them, but I knew she was just relieved thatthey were treating her as if she was normal, now that shewasn’t the uptight virgin anymore. But inside, I could smellit: she still felt ashamed, dirty with sin. She hadn’t goneback to her christ, Yshwa. Instead she went to see thatother boy she’d been talking to over the summer, thatother brother of a friend, the one who was there when sheleft Soren. Ada thought she might love this new boy. If shecould love Soren, then why not this one? But while I waskissing him on the blue mattress of Ada’s dorm room, Idrifted her hand down between his legs and recoiled at thethinness of his penis.“I can’t work with that,” I told Ada, and I ended thecrush.She didn’t argue with me. I had her call Itohan’syounger brother, and she broke up with him.“I was feeling single already,” he said. He soundedpetulant.“Good,” I told Ada. “It’s better this way.”“If you say so,” she said, and she let him go.The next summer, we went back to Georgia, and I setmy sights on Itohan’s older brother. Ada never forgave mefor what I did to him.*She wasn’t doing a lot of forgiving, to be fair. Not of me,not of herself. Before Soren, Ada had been obsessed withher christ, that Yshwa. She loved him, or to be moreaccurate, she adored and worshipped him, which is exactlyhow he likes it. She lived for him. I don’t even know why—he was never there for her, not like me, not even close. Hecouldn’t even be bothered to materialize when she was justa little girl, when she really, really needed him. How canyou leave a child alone like that? But whatever—it’s stupidto think that gods actually care about you. Ada stoppedtalking to him after I was born, all because of that promiseshe’d made to be abstinent, which is another thing I don’tunderstand. Her body meant more to me than it ever did toher. Promising abstinence was like promising not to playwith a weapon that she didn’t even like in the first place.After Soren was done with her, Ada walked away fromYshwa and straight into my arms, where she belonged.Yshwa’s teachings included a lot about repentance andforgiveness and being white as the snow of a bleachedlamb, the general gist being that you could fuck up andstart over, and Ada believed in it until I was born and thenshe didn’t.She tried to, since it seemed like a betrayal to lose faithso deeply, to be that lost, but she just couldn’t believe thatshe would ever be clean again. Now that I was there, withmy sleek skin and wet hair, she was probably right. Icouldn’t be excised. Life moves in only one direction andthings couldn’t go back to what they used to be: bright anduntouched, with Ada being ignorant of what our sharedbody now meant and what it could be used for. All thatmattered was this, and I told her—I had to use the bodyfirst, before they did.Yshwa didn’t give up on Ada, which was touching, Isuppose. He started to materialize inside her mind, as if hewas one of us, as if he belonged there. He was trying toreach her but I never liked him, so I blocked him at everychance. He had too much light inside him, it was alwaysreflecting off the marble and glaring into my eyes. I wouldhave to pull in shadows just to soak it all up. But it wasn’tdifficult to keep him away from Ada; she didn’t believe himanyway, that he would take her back. Yshwa kept trying totell her what it would take her three years to hear, thatshe hadn’t done anything wrong, but she was so hurt andbroken that she heard nothing. The only one who waslistening to him was me, and he could tell I didn’t care.Yshwa had this way of looking at me, with this half-loving,half-sad face, his head tilted to one side and darknessdrifting off his shoulders from the shadows I tried to throwon him.“I’m just trying to help her, you know.” His voice wastucked and soft. I didn’t care.“I don’t care,” I told him. “Just go away.”“I want to help you too. I can help you too.”“I don’t need your help. Go away.”“Asụghara,” he said, and my name sounded like a springbubbling in his mouth.I glimmered in and out impatiently. He was sittingcross-legged on the marble, wearing bone-colored linens,his hair short and curled this time. I stood by her eyes,looking out, dressed in matte black. The shadows weregood at sticking to me.“Do you really think what you’re doing with Ada ishelping?” he asked, and I could feel my temper growingmy nails out, long and pointed, dark red like his blood anhour after they pierced his side. I folded my arms andstared at him. I wanted him to leave.“Are you angry with me?” he asked.“I don’t want you here,” I told him. “You make her sad.You remind her of too much shit. You know I don’t give afuck about you, but you still matter to her, and this”—Igestured at his presence on my marble—“all this does ismake it harder. For her.”He looked at me as if I was a wound. “You’re so faraway from home,” he said, so quietly that I thought he wastalking to himself. Then he added, “I’m not leaving her.You understand?”“Then you’re an idiot,” I snapped. “It doesn’t matterwhether you say you’re leaving her or not. You don’t wantto hear word—Ada is not talking to you anymore.”“She talks to me all the time,” Yshwa shot back. “She’scrying, she’s screaming, the girl is sorry all the time.There’s so much guilt over her eyes, it covers everythingelse.”I scoffed at him. Gods always think everything is aboutthem. “Biko, that’s not talking. That’s basically her tellingyou good-bye. As in, you’re behind her while I’m in front.In fact, I’m around her. I’m everywhere. She tells me whatshe’s too ashamed to tell you.”“You are the thing she’s ashamed of,” he reminded me.“And I hear everything anyway.”I was amazed at how well I was keeping my temper.“Clap for yourself. She’s still not talking to you. So goaway.”He stood up, towering above me. “I’ll be here,Asụghara. Ada knows that.”“She has me.” I couldn’t help snarling at him when Isaid it. “It’s enough.”Yshwa touched my cheek and his palm felt like wet silk.“I’m not ashamed of you,” he said, as if it was nothing.“You know I love you.”I jerked my head away. “Fuck you.”He gave me that damn look again as he left, the fuckingresurrected bastard, but I didn’t care, I was just glad thathe was gone. He wasn’t getting her back. Ada was mine, Itold myself, standing in the empty marble.She was mine.Chapter EightThe back of your brain is open.WeAllow us to interject; these births are complicatedmoltings, leaving skins all over the place. But remainassured, Asụghara’s presence was not our absence, neverthat. We fell back when she burst forward, true, but we aremany and she was just one of us, a beastself, a weaponthat needed to be put in play. We let her mount the Ada,we let that story ride out—it has as many layers as we do.Here is one of them: the story of the other gods.We have told you about some of them—Yshwa, forexample. Ala, the controller of minor gods, our mother. Butthere are others, and anyone who knows anything knowsthis, knows about the godly stowaways that came alongwhen the corrupters stole our people, what the swollenhulls carried over the bellied seas, the masks, the skin onthe inside of the drum, the words under the words, thewater in the water. The stories that survived, the newnames they took, the temper of old gods sweeping throughnew land, the music taken that is the same as the musicleft behind. And, of course, the humans who survived,those selected among them, the ones in white, the onesshaking shells and mineral deposits, the ones ridden, theones chosen, the ones who follow, work, and serve becausecalls pass through blood no matter how many oceans youdrop death into.Those humans recognized us easily; it was as if theycould smell us under the Ada’s skin or feel us in the airthat heaved around her. After the Ada left home and gottucked into that little town in the mountains, she met oneof them, the Dominican girl with the cigars. Her name wasMalena and she was a daughter of Chang , of SantaB rbara. She met the Ada at a meeting for the communityservice fraternity they’d both joined, before the Ada metSoren, before Asụghara arrived in the third birth-skinning.The two of them, Malena and the Ada, used to sit out onthe redbrick porches of the old school buildings and smokecigars together, listening to the sharp breaking calls ofDominican palos pierce the air on the humped backs ofdrums and seedsounds. On one of those nights, we flungourselves through the Ada’s body, dancing to the words wecould and could not hear, dark air around us. Malenawatched us with slitted eyes, a cigar in her red and whitemouth, smoke wrapping her face.On another night, Malena’s body was there but Malenawas gone, and a mansaint with a deep voice used themuscles of her mouth. He gave the Ada a message to giveto Malena for when she got her body back, something wecan’t remember now, but that is expected: the messagewas for Malena and not for us, after all. When the Adapassed it on, Malena was unfazed; it was normal for her, tobe mounted and then left by saints, gods, spirits. The Adawas amazed but we were respectful. We loved Malenabecause she smelled like us.But all these new things changed nothing; we were stillọgbanje, and back home, our brothersisters held manyangers against us—for being born incorrectly, for notreturning, for crossing the ocean sifted with death.Nevertheless, we were still one of them. None of theirgrievances would ever change that and they knew it, sothey sent us messages, reminders of who we were, breadcrumbs for when the Ada would unblock her ears andunderstand the weight stitched inside her stomach. Theypushed her toward Malena, they put words under Malena’stongue.“There’s a claim on your head, Ada,” she told us. “Backhome. Something wants you back home.”“Who?” The Ada didn’t know the things we did. None ofthis sounded like anything to her.“I don’t know.” Malena pushed her black hair off herface and poured a glass of Johnnie Walker. “These areWest African gods, not mine, so I can’t speak to them likethat, you know?”She told us other things, though. “You’re the daughterof Santa Marta,” she said, early on. “La Dominadora.”The Ada looked her up online and we all gazed at theimported image on the computer screen: a mirrored forestof black hair springing from the scalp, the scaled lengthsof our mother’s ambassadors wrapped around SantaMarta’s hands. It was all the same, a million mothers witha million names all flicking their quick tongues over theclear path to our spine.We wondered—what would Ala have said to Malena’sclaim that Santa Marta was the Ada’s mother? An old godto a newer, younger one. Santa Marta, the one who raisesthe wind and uncovers the bones, while the humans throwup circular pinnacles of clay in Ala’s name, raking fiverows in the earth on either side. Ala, the god that giveschildren with both hands and watches them multiply likeleaves creeping over the earth, seven seas roaring underher feet. Perhaps she would call Santa Marta by her othername, Filomena Lubana, and warn her not to send herhusband into the Ada’s dreams. San Elias, El Bar n delCementerio, the Baron. Whoever guards the underworldguards Ala’s womb, you see; they are the same place. TheBaron stepped over an island and into twenty-one rivers toput his name on the Ada’s tongue, so she called it out.(What do you do when a lwa wants you? No, that is adifferent story—forget the Baron.) It would be a warning,we decided, Ala to Filomena Lubana, a warning that thechild was not hers. Nine Marta bore and nine Martaburied. The Ada has always belonged to Ala, and Ala is notinclined to share. Take away those brown eggs and honey.In Virginia, Malena watched clotted scratches and cutserupt on the Ada’s arms. She talked to her saints and hersaints spoke to her.“They told me you were going to kill yourself,” she saidto the Ada, years later. “When we were in school. Youremember? You started breaking glass, cutting yourself?Yeah. That was them.” Cigar smoke. Whiskey mouth. “YourAfrican, he was on top of you and you just couldn’t shakehim. You were telling me that you just couldn’t do itanymore.”The Ada listened while on a slow train pulling itselfthrough the desert of the Southwest, away from Saachi’shouse, toward the Pacific. Malena was in New York, deepin Queens, her voice ten years familiar by then.“I saved your life, Ada.” She never told the Ada whatexactly she’d worked or what the rituals looked like, onlythat they were necessary. “I held a lot of stuff that wasgonna hurt you,” she said. “The problem is that when youhave saints, old-school saints, trying to communicate withyou, they don’t understand. It’s like talking to your grandgrand-granddaddy about the Internet.”We wondered why Malena watched us, why she cared,who had sent her. “Thank you,” said the Ada, smiling intothe phone, her head resting on the ruined Amtrak glass.“You crazy?” Malena scoffed, thousands of miles packedinto it. “I love you. I would do whatever for you to be therein my life. I didn’t want to tell you because at the end ofthe day you’re my sister and what I wouldn’t do for mysister and my blood.”She paused to shout in Spanish at someone on her sideof the connection and came back to the line, her voicefirm.“You would’ve done it for me.”It is like we said, we loved her, from back when we alllived in the mountains, for the way she loved us, all of us,and never made the Ada feel insane. For the way she was awitness. She worked for the other gods, yes, but she lovedus and perhaps she did help save the Ada; perhaps whatshe worked was part of the veil-tearing that broughtAsụghara here, the third birth. We do not know theseother gods, so we cannot verify the impact of what theirworkers wrought. It was a small mercy, though, to bearound those humans who could see us flashing beneaththe Ada’s skin. The worst part of embodiment is beingunseen. When the Ada got married, perhaps it would havebeen better if she married someone like that. But she wasinsisting on being human and she married a human. Hewas a force of a human, true, with storm eyes and handslike a future, but he was still just a human.We should have saved her for a god.Chapter NineMgbe nnukwu mmanwụ pụta, obele mmanwụ na-agba ọsọ.AdaI don’t even have the mouth to tell this story. I’m so tiredmost of the time. Besides, whatever they will say will bethe truest version of it, since they are the truest version ofme. It’s a strange thing to say, I know, considering thatthey made me mad. But I am not entirely opposed tomadness, not when it comes with this kind of clarity. Theworld in my head has been far more real than the oneoutside—maybe that’s the exact definition of madness,come to think of it. It’s all a secret I’ve had to keep, but nolonger, not since you’re reading this. And it should allmake sense; I didn’t want to be alone, so I chose them. Inmany ways, you see, I am not even real.When they speak so contemptuously of humans, I’mnever sure if they mean me as well. Sometimes I wonder ifthere even is a me without them. They talk about Ewan,the man I married, as if he was nothing, because he wasonly flesh. But I loved him and that made him more thanhuman to me. Love is transformative in that way. Likesmall gods, it can bring out the prophet in you. You findyourself selling dreams of spectacular hereafters, possibleonly if you believe, if you really, really believe. So in lovingEwan, he somehow became a god. I don’t mean that in agood way—he made me suffer but I still cast idols in hisname, as people have done for their gods for millennia. Itdidn’t end there. When the years accumulated and exposedEwan’s cracks, I covered them in gold and bronze. That’swhat you do for the idols you make. But I loved him, Ireally did, and he loved me, and that was the danger—isthere any story of a human loving a god that ends well? Iwas so busy pretending I was normal back then, I didn’tknow enough to think of that. So maybe he made mesuffer, but how much can flesh really hurt spirit? Who doyou think will be bruised more in the end?You see, you’ve gone and caught me. I’m talking as ifI’m them. It’s all right. In many ways, I am not even real. Iam not even here.Chapter TenDo you feel real when he touches you or do you still feel dead?AsụgharaI wasn’t born when Ada met Ewan, but I can tell the storyanyway. And I’m even glad I wasn’t there. It’s good thatAda had that for herself, before the rest of us got to her.Like me and Soren, Ewan happened in Virginia. It waswinter and there was a party at the tennis house, bodiespressing in a crush downstairs and music thudding againstthe plaster of the walls. Ada had gone upstairs to one ofthe bedrooms, where the noise faded away into strains ofreggae and blue light filtering through a computer screen.Ewan was sitting on the bed with his back to the wall, butshe had no idea who he was; she’d never seen or noticedhim before that night. A friend introduced them and Ewanwas easy, charming, comfortable. Soon Ada was sittingnext to him, both of them chatting as people came in andout of the room, smoke softening the air around them.Ewan was Irish, green-eyed, the star of the tennis team.When they tentatively held hands, Ada smiled nervously.She was only eighteen and she was still sweet.“My mother thinks my palms are rough,” she said. Adadidn’t feel delicate—she never had. At fourteen, shecouldn’t fit into dresses Saachi wore when she was twentyfive.Ewan ran his thumb over her life line. “No,” he said,looking at her as if she was wedding crystal. “They’re verysoft.”Ada blushed. She stayed with him until the friends shecame with were ready to leave. The next day was aSaturday and, as usual, everyone ended up at Gilligan’s.Ada kept looking around for Ewan as the night wore in andaround, but he didn’t show up and her heart sank. It beganto climb again, cautiously, when she ran into one of hisroommates as the club was closing out, and, giddy withluck, caught a ride back to the tennis house. She hung outwith them upstairs, trying to seem casual when she wasreally waiting and hoping. Finally, Ewan wandered into theroom and smiled to see her.“I had a feeling it was you,” he said, and took her downto his room, where she taught him to play cards withMaxwell playing in the background. It was four in themorning, but Ada had gotten what she wanted, to see him.She always got what she wanted, even before I showed up.There was a framed photograph of a girl in a graduationgown on his dresser, but Ada didn’t ask any questions. Sheknew enough to avoid certain answers, and the momentwith Ewan was too significant to disturb with whatever hisactual life held. All that mattered was that he made herlaugh and that there was so much peace with him, shecould almost see it in the air. When he leaned in to kissher, she tasted sharp smoke in his flesh and she could seethe starkness of his skin against hers. It was her first timekissing a white person, and briefly, she wondered why hedidn’t have any lips. He didn’t seem real, from the thickrichness of his voice and the weight of his rolledconsonants to the things about his life that sounded as ifthey were pulled from the Frank McCourt memoirs she’dread as a child. He felt like an escape, so Ada spent thenight wrapped up and tucked in his arms while he playedAl Green to her. We’re dying today, she thought. I could dothis for almost forever.She went back to her dorm room in the morning. It wasfinals week, so she continued studying, and in theafternoon, she ran into Ewan in the library. He leaned outof his carrel to share his earphones with her.“Listen to this,” he said, and played her some Amos Lee.Ada wrote down the name of the song and then Ewankissed her cheek and left.In the evening, she went to a final exhibit for aphotography class because she’d modeled for one of herfriends in the class and she knew Juan, another of thephotography students. He was from Mexico, slim andbrown and beautiful. He used to live in the house down thehill with Luka, and he burned packs and packs of IndiaTemple incense. One evening, he and Ada had sat togetherand talked about how amazing it would be if either of themcould play the violin. Juan had laughed and tilted his headback. “I’d just sit on my porch with a bowl of weed andplay it all day, man.” He’d held an imaginary bow andmoved it against imaginary strings, and Ada had wishedthat all of it was real, that she was on that porch with himand the music and nothing else.At the exhibit, when they lifted up the first of Juan’sprints, Ada nearly choked. Every photograph was of Ewan.The air around her thickened. As they placed each printon the lighted ledge, a weight began to press on her,crushing her with colors and reflections and textures. Sheremembered everything she thought she’d forgotten fromthe previous nights: the scarf around Ewan’s neck with theforest-green clover in the corner, smoke wreathing upfrom his mouth, the taste of it from his lips and tongue.She glanced around the room, wondering if anyone couldtell how affected she was by the photographs. Ewan hadleft for the winter break already. He was gone, and nowshe was left behind, asphyxiating on his image.Much later, I would discover that Ewan always tastedlike a drug, even in his absences. But that night, it was Adawho lay on her bed in her dorm room and let the rush ofhim stretch out her veins. Ewan felt like a better madnessto her than anything else had before. She rolled over onher stomach and pulled out her diary to write to him, sincehe was not there.“I’m returning to sanity,” she wrote, “to the real world.But I will never forget how it felt to be overwhelmed byyour beauty. You made me feel so alive and so right, and Iknow that in the real world, I will feel nothing for you and Iwill move on, and we’ll follow these rules because when itcomes down to survival, we have to. I envy your girl, theone who holds your heart. If you ever need to take a breakfrom this world, call me. I will come to you in a heartbeatand we will steal time.”*Ewan didn’t come back the next semester.Ada e-mailed him through his school e-mail and, afterweeks, gave up on him replying. Classes began withouthim, the parties thudded through the houses and he wasn’tthere, and quickly enough, everything she’d felt with himstopped feeling even faintly real. You can’t really sustain amadness like that without its object’s presence. Ada soonhad other problems to deal with anyway. There was Soren,and then there was me, my loud birth, the summer inGeorgia, and then we all came back to Virginia. TheAugust heat was beating through the glass windows of theschool gym when Ada saw Ewan again. I was inside themarble room when I felt her heart shake and I turned myhead sharply to look at him.“Wait,” I said. “Who’s that?”“Nobody,” she said, smiling as she said hello and walkedpast. “A ghost. Don’t mind him.”I looked back at him as we walked away. “You know youcan’t lie to me. Is he important?”Ada took a deep breath. “We’ll see.”I was curious. I went to her memories and looked upeverything I needed to know. She didn’t think much of hisreturn, that part was true. Too much had happened, toomuch hurt.But that Saturday, Ada was at Gilligan’s and Ewanstopped her on the dance floor, drunk, his accent tumblingout with force.“You’re the classiest person I’ve met at this school,” hesaid. “Come by the house. We’ll listen to music again.”Ada watched the back of his head as he left. She wasthoughtful. By then, she was more used to me, since wehad just spent our first few months together. I liked thatbecause with me there, it meant that she was less alone.“What do you think?” she asked me.I didn’t even need to consider it. “Oh, I think we shouldgo,” I said, a bit selfishly, since I just wanted to see formyself if that chemistry in her memory was the real thing,if the two of them could make it happen again. Anyone whofelt like a drug was a person I was interested in. Ever sinceI dropped the one with the thin penis, I had been so bored.I missed having toys to play with.A few days later, we walked down the hill to the houseEwan had moved to, up the street from Luka. Ada wasnervous because she wasn’t exactly sure if she would bewelcome there. Ewan had been drunk when he invited her—maybe he hadn’t meant it. At the house, the boys hadjust come back from practice, rackets and sweateverywhere.“Oh god,” Ada whispered to me as we stepped throughthe doorway. “What am I doing here?”“Hold on,” I said, pressing against her eyes. “There heis.”Ewan looked up from the couch he was on and sprang tohis feet, welcoming Ada with a surprised smile. He hadn’texpected her to show up but was clearly glad that she did.I watched, fascinated, as they left the house and walked toMain Street, down to the coffee shop, where he and Adasat as she played him Nina Simone through a shared set ofearphones. The mountains were tall and green aroundthem. I sat in Ada and didn’t interfere, minding my ownbusiness for once.She never gave him the number to her dorm room andthey never e-mailed or planned anything. Ada would justwalk down that hill with the grass brushing her ankles,cool sunshine on her head, his room at the end of herjourney. They would listen to music, talk, and then shestarted spending the night once in a while, lying in hisarms under three comforters when the weather turnedcold. His bed was a mattress lodged behind a dresser andbraced against the wall. They didn’t even kiss. I don’tknow why I left them alone—maybe I felt she had more ofa right to him because she met him before I was born. Buthe was different, you know; he was not someone I neededto hunt. He meant her no harm. He didn’t even try to touchher. So I could, for a while at least, allow it to continue.On Wednesdays they danced against the bar at the Irishpub, and on Saturdays, on the dance floor at Gilligan’s.Ewan loved Ada’s short hair and she compared that withItohan’s younger brother, who had told her with disgustthat she would look like a boy. With Ewan, they justlistened to music and talked about their childhoods, and itwas all nice and innocent if you forget that they werehumans who had hearts. Eventually, they started towonder what exactly they were doing, and that’s how theyended up on the couch in Ewan’s room, both nervous andunsure.“I have a girlfriend,” he said.“I know,” said Ada. They looked at each other.“I’ve cheated on her before, with other girls.”They had avoided either of these truths because thatwas the real world, the one that wasn’t supposed toinfringe on their bubble. Bringing it up scared the shit outof Ada. She didn’t want to be out there alone, so shereached for me. I came in, but I entered gently because itwasn’t time to fight yet. She just needed a little coldness, apinch of ruthlessness. I looked back at Ewan with her eyes.“Okay?” I said.“I can’t do it with you,” he explained. “It would bedifferent, I already know. I would care too much, getemotionally attached.” His words were floating up towardthe old ceiling.Inside the marble room, I looked at Ada and she shookher head. She wasn’t looking for anything. She didn’tbelieve in that anymore.“Are you sure?” I asked her.She shrugged, wrapping her arms around herself. “Ifound him and he makes me happy. That’s enough for me.Who needs a forever?”I nodded. “No wahala. Whatever you want.”I turned back to him. “I don’t want a relationship fromyou,” I said, as if none of it was a big deal. I was cool,languid, casual. “I like you. You like me. It’s that simple.”Ewan laughed and Ada smiled back at him and thebubble stayed safe. In his bed that night, Ewan held herface and kissed her for all the time they had waited. WhenAda kissed him back, it was very different from their firstkiss, the one that happened before I was born. She hadn’tknown desire then. This time, she had me, and he hadcome back, and so she drank smoke from his mouth like itwas air. I barely even had to be there.His girlfriend remained a pale face in a picture frame onhis dresser. Ada continued to flow through Ewan’s life:nothing holding her, nothing keeping her, nothing pushingher away. One night at the Irish pub, she danced to aShakira song with a Brazilian friend, their hips intimate,moving in a way a white boy’s couldn’t. Ewan smiled at herfrom the bar where he was standing with his friends.“I wasn’t in the least bit jealous, you know,” he told herafterward, when she was back in his arms.“Why not?” she asked.Ewan smiled again, assured. “I know it’s me you like.”He was right. Still, for a while all they did after thesenights out was curl up in his bed, make out, and thensleep. Everyone knew about them. His best friend couldn’tbelieve they hadn’t fucked yet. Even me, sef—sometimes Icouldn’t believe we hadn’t fucked yet. Luka had pulledback from Ada because he and Ewan were good friendsand it was clear who she’d chosen. I knew it was the rightchoice. Everything with Ewan was moving at a differentpace, one I wasn’t interfering with, one that no one hadgiven Ada before. I wasn’t going to fuck that up for her.My job was just to be there if she needed me. Besides, Iliked Ewan. He was a typical bad boy, after all—older,popular, a writer who drank all the time and smoked weedand cigarettes and blacked out regularly. Ada was themodel student—she was both president of her graduatingclass and, at nineteen, the youngest person in it. Everyoneat the school, like in Georgia, only saw her and couldn’tsee me. It was fine. No wahala. They didn’t need to see mefor me to be who I was.One night, Ewan turned to Ada at the pub. “We haveunfinished business,” he said, his eyes wrinkling as hesmiled. If she didn’t know what he meant, I did. I knowhow to recognize my cues. But Ada didn’t mind. She likedhim and I liked him, so it all worked out. Except that Adawas still Ada and I was still me, and this was where weoverlapped. She didn’t have a capacity for desire that randeep enough for fucking, she never did. Ada has beenconsistent. When it came to things like that, she came tome. We are the same person, you get? So that night, whenEwan took off her clothes, me, I took my place under herskin. I had made her a promise. I do not make exceptions.*She fell in love with him weeks later. I get annoyed justremembering it. I had been having a fantastic time withEwan before that because, as it turned out, he had a darkside too, one that looked like me, a cruel and ruthlessthing. I saw it one night when his eyes were cold and hisvoice was flat, when he covered Ada’s mouth with a roughhand as he fucked me. When he was done, he got off thebed and tossed a towel at Ada, lighting a cigarette. Adadidn’t say anything and Ewan turned away from her on thebed, closing his eyes. “Come on,” I told her, and I had herput on her shoes in the heavy dark and leave quietly.It was Halloween a few days later and Ada showed up tothe party at Ewan’s house dressed as me, wearing a blackcorset, a tiny black skirt, knee-high boots, and shiningskin. Her friends leaned in, laughing.“And what are you supposed to be?” they asked.I grinned back at them with her teeth. “Whatever youwant,” I said.I had Ada walk straight to Ewan’s room, depositing herbody on his lap. He wrapped a freckled arm around her aspeople flowed in and out of his doorway.“I’ve been feeling bad about what I’m doing to mygirlfriend,” he confessed.Oh fuck, I thought, feelings. I wonder how theconversation would have gone if he could have reachedAda in that moment. She probably would havereciprocated; she always responded to honesty andvulnerability, she was sweet like that. But I had her bodythat night, and so he had to deal with me and I really hatewhen people talk about feelings.“Is that why you were all fucking weird the othernight?” I asked. He made a face and I shoved my fingerinto his ribs. “I don’t need that nonsense. Next time you’rein a mood like that, just don’t fuck me at all.”Ewan stayed serious and looked into Ada’s eyes, hisvoice matter-of-fact. “What you and I have, it’s more thanfucking,” he said. “I’m basically in a relationship with you.”I swore to myself when he said that—I could already feelAda’s heart pounding. Stupid, stupid girl.I turned inward for a moment, just to deal with her. Shewas twisting her hands together in the marble room, hiswords still ringing against the walls. “No,” I said, beforeshe could get a word out. “Don’t even fucking think aboutit.”“But, Asụghara, he just said—”“No!” I glared at her and she fell silent. I could see Iwas crushing her, but there was no other option. I couldn’tallow her hope any room to breathe; I had to choke it out. Iwas protecting her.“Allow me to handle this,” I told her. “Stay here.”I turned back out and gave Ewan a sharp look, keepingmy voice loose but cutting. “That’s too bad for you,” I said.“Because I’m not in a relationship with anyone.”Ewan laughed and shook his head. He looked tired. Itwas not the last time he would look for Ada only to be metwith me.“So, what do you want to do?” I asked him. “You want tostop?”He looked up at me and shifted his face, locking awayhis emotions, returning to the way I liked him. “It’sHalloween and I’ve got a horny nineteen-year-old in aslutty black costume sitting in my lap,” he said. He wastwenty-seven then. “What do you think?”“Good,” I answered, and kissed him with Ada’s mouth. Iwasn’t done playing with him. It was ideal—Ada didn’thave time to think about Soren or what he’d done, eventhough she was back on the same campus where ithappened. I had barely thought about my own birth myself.I was busy trying out new toys, like getting Ada drunk forthe first time. Had I known earlier how useful alcoholwould be in lubricating my relationship with Ada andbringing us together, I would have stocked her life withbottles. But that first time happened completely byaccident—she drank too many Smirnoff Ices on an emptystomach, because I was still having her starve herself, andshe was already halfway drunk by the time she agreed totry some margaritas at the club.Ewan wasn’t out with her that night, so Ada’s friendsdropped her off at his house after the club. It was winter,but she was wearing a flared miniskirt and black boxerboots. It was three in the morning and Ewan’s door wasbolted shut from inside his room. His housemates werestill awake, but Ada didn’t want to talk to any of them; shejust wanted to sleep. It was too cold to walk up the hill toher dorm, and their living room was filthy, so she couldn’tcrash on a couch. She banged on his door and called hisname, but Ewan didn’t answer.“You know he’s drunk and passed out,” I told her. “Biko,just kick the fucking door down.”I liked drunk Ada because instead of arguing, sheactually agreed with me. She needed to sleep, his roomwas the solution, and the door was an obstacle that neededto be removed. Simple. She’d also taken karate lessons allsemester, so it was perfect. The alcohol made her morelike me, cold and steady, and Ada timed her roundhousekicks to land with precision on the painted wood of hisdoor.The noise brought Ewan’s best friend downstairs. “Whatthe fuck’s going on?”Ada waved her hand at the door. “Ewan’s passed outand I need to sleep, so I’m kicking it down,” she explained.I giggled inside her.The best friend looked from Ada to the door, thennodded. “Okay.” He held out one of the McDonald’ssandwiches he was holding. “Want one?”They ate and talked, and Ada excused herself to smashher heel into the door every few minutes. I am still notsure how much of her was me that night, to be honest, butI can tell you it was a lot more than usual. We weresynched and it was beautiful.The bolt to Ewan’s room went into the wall, so when thedoor finally broke, it did so at its hinges, the doorframecracking and shuddering as it gave way. Ada squeezedthrough the small space and climbed into bed with Ewan.He cracked open sleepy blue eyes to smile at her.“Unbelievable,” I muttered at him. “Breaking down thedoor doesn’t wake you up, but me climbing into bed does.”In the morning, Ada woke up sober and with her firsthangover. When she realized what had happened, she wasso horrified that she couldn’t stop apologizing to Ewan. Hethought it was hilarious. So did all his friends, but fordifferent reasons. They spread the story that Ada had beenso desperate to fuck Ewan that she broke his door down.Ada found it humiliating, but I took some of that feelingaway for her. The rumors didn’t matter. Those peopledidn’t matter—shit, barely anyone mattered. The brokendoor stayed propped up until Ewan moved out of thathouse. No one ever fixed it.Everything wore down into a cycle. Ewan drank andsmoked like he was dying. Ada drank tequila, now that I’ddiscovered that it made her sink deeper into me. She andEwan fucked and partied and rinsed and repeated. Istarted to come out more and more. On the porch ofLuka’s house, sitting with Malena, I discovered that I couldput out a cigar on Ada’s palm and a blister would rise.Malena just shook her head at me. She was the witness—she was the only person who saw me through Ada’s skin—and I loved her for that. I had Ada switch from Malena’scigars to thin chocolate cigarillos, and she would smokethem as she walked down the hill to Ewan’s house, leavinga faint taste of cocoa on her lips. He woke up one night tofind me standing in his room in the darkness, watchinghim in Ada’s body, a dark silhouette with a glowing redlight at my mouth.He called me the devil. I didn’t mind. I’d heard thatbefore. I wondered if he noticed when he lost her and gotme instead.“It’s scary when I make all your fantasies come true,isn’t it?” I told him.He should never have touched her if he wanted to keepher, but how could he know? Humans. Still, I shouldn’thave been surprised that Ada fell in love with him. Sheread the stories he wrote, he kissed her hand on theirnights out and told her how lucky he was to have her, howlucky he was that she chose him. I didn’t disagree—he wasright, he was lucky to have us. Ada cooked dinners for himand his housemates, and they sat around the dining table,loud and lovely, eating dhal and Malaysian parathas. It feltlike, between me and her, we knew both sides of him—thebright and the dark, the kind and the cruel, one for each ofus. We knew what he was capable of, something hisfaraway girlfriend didn’t. Anyway, Ada went and fell inlove and decided to tell him, and I didn’t stop her becauseshe would have quarreled with me about it. Love doespeople like that. It was easier to just let her go ahead—Icould shield her from whatever the outcome was.They were lying in his bed as she stammered it out, hersentences breaking as she tried to remember what he’dtold her recently, that it didn’t matter what anyone elsethought, that they were the only ones who mattered. Ewanwas patient, his face close to hers, breathing in herexhalations, holding her against him as she looked for thecourage to break her own heart.“If you ever make me feel stupid for saying this, I willkill you,” Ada said, her eyes stinging. Ewan smiled a littleand she squeezed her eyes shut, taking a deep breath. “Ilove you,” she whispered, and then the sadness rushed in.“I’m sorry. I know it’s not what we agreed, I know I onlyasked you to never lie to me and never make me feelcheap, and you’ve kept your side of the bargain and Ihaven’t and I’m sorry. It’s just that I don’t want anyonewho’s not you.”“Hey, hey. It’s okay.” Ewan brushed his fingers over theside of her face. “I already knew you were going to saythat, and I know it took a lot of courage. When you feelstrongly about something, it’s a good thing to let it out.”He didn’t say it back. Of course he didn’t say it back.This isn’t that kind of story. But he held Ada for a longtime, lying on his back with her head on his shoulder. Thenight grew deeper. I sat alone in the marble and let herhave this with him.“You can turn to your side,” Ada whispered. “I knowthat’s how you need to sleep.”Ewan kissed her forehead. “Shut up,” he said. “Stoptrying to take care of everyone else.”*Everyone left for Christmas break soon after. Ada went toSaachi and A uli and said nothing about Ewan becausethere was nothing to say. When she came back to Virginia,she ran into him at Gilligan’s and his eyes lit up. Theystood by the bar and caught up, leaning toward each otherto shut out the rest of the noise.“I wanted to get you this CD I saw, but I thought it wastoo clich  to give the African girl a CD with African musicon it,” Ewan told her, and she laughed. They stayed in theclub until they’d both missed their rides.“Let’s just walk,” he suggested. It was three miles backto his house and he held Ada’s hand the whole way as hetold her about his girlfriend, how much he adored her, thatthey’d talked about breaking up.“You told me once that you’re more honest with me thanyou ever were with her,” Ada said.Ewan nodded. “Probably true,” he said.They kept walking and Ada looked up at the largeness ofthe sky. It was strange, she thought, to be here in Virginia,with this man, inside this bubble they’d built.“What kind of parents do you think we’d be?” she asked.Ewan thought for a moment. “I think if a guy came upand said outright, ‘I’m fucking your daughter,’ we’dprobably just look at each other—”“—and shrug—” added Ada.“—and say, ‘You know what? Fair enough.’” Theylaughed as they crossed a road and cut through a parkinglot. “Can you imagine what our kid would look like?”“What, brown skinned with freckles?” said Ada,giggling.“And a ginger afro.” Ewan bent over laughing, and Iwatched them both from inside her head, amused. It wascute. They talked about how their families would receivethem—they talked as if things weren’t impossible, as ifchoices hadn’t already been made. I didn’t interfere, notyet. When they got to his room and got into bed, Adahesitated.“We don’t have to do anything,” she said. “Things havechanged, you know, we can step back and just be friends.Nothing would get broken.”Ewan smiled. “You’re beautiful and you’re lying next tome.”He reached out to her and I entered his arms. I can onlybe what I was born to be.Trust me, I wanted things to go back to the way theywere, free and easy, but Ada couldn’t do it. It was too late,now that she loved him. She started feeling guilty all thetime, imagining how it would feel for his girlfriend if sheknew about their affair. It was easy to imagine the pain ofbetrayal—after all, Ada loved him too now. She and the girlwere basically on the same side. He and I were, for allpurposes, the villains in this.Also, Ada had gotten the Depo-Provera shot, a load ofhormones that made her bleed for eight weeks nonstop. Itthrew off the fragile balance she and I kept in her mind,and there were terrible mood swings, a gutting depression.Ada owned a bokken, a wooden Japanese sword, and onenight she used it to smash the mirror in her dorm room,screaming tears as glass flew across the hardwood floor.The shards glinted in her fingers as she drew them downthe inside of her arm, watching the bright red bubblethrough brown skin. I moaned inside her, greedy for themother color she was feeding me. We were pulling apart.Ada sat on the floor surrounded by a hundred mirrorpieces and cried.Her friend Catia, a military brat who hung out with herand Malena, came by to get Ada for lunch. She saw themess and the blood and sighed.“Oh, Ada,” she said. “Let’s clean this up.”I liked her for that, for how she never made Ada feeldamaged. Ada loved her. Catia was quiet but forceful, apastor’s daughter. On a night run to Taco Bell once, whenCatia was driving and Malena was sitting in the back withAda, they stopped at a liquor store and Malena bought herusual bottle of Johnnie Walker, tipping some of it to theground before getting back in the car. She offered some toAda, but Ada refused. Now that she drank, I preferred herto stick to tequila. Malena looked at Ada and knew she wasthinking about Ewan.“He loves you, Ada. He just doesn’t know it yet.”Ada made a face. “Yeah, whatever,” she said.Malena shrugged with half-lidded eyes. “You’ll see, mihermana. You’ll see.”Catia smiled slightly at us through the rearview mirror,and Ada looked out the window, her heart hurting. Ewanhad started cleaning up his life after a bad Salvia trip hehad one night, when he said Ada came to him in a vision,sent by the devil. He said it was her, but if there wasanyone a devil would send, we all know by now—it wouldbe me. Ewan just couldn’t tell the difference.“Clearly, we’re both way too Catholic,” I joked, but hewas serious. He stopped smoking weed; he cut back on thedrinking and focused on his classes. Ada was so proud ofhim. I was alarmed.“I’ve given up all my vices,” he said. “Except you.”“You’re going to give me up?” Ada whispered. I couldtaste the grief in the back of her throat. She didn’t want tobe just another drug polluting his life, and she wasn’t, shereally wasn’t. It was me, but we were one, so I didn’t knowwhat to tell her.Ewan looked at her sadly. “I don’t know if I can,” headmitted.The whole thing became a loop, as these things oftendo. Ada stopped sleeping with Ewan, so I stopped fuckinghim, and instead they cooked together at his new place,making nasi goreng in a smooth dance across the kitchenfloor, with knife and cutting board, onions and meat, oiland spices. He tossed the wok and washed the dishes, andAda was so happy. I left her alone that night—it had beenso long since she could be this happy. She made him watchSarafina! and they ate Cadbury chocolates and fell asleepand nothing happened. But then, eventually, I fell backinto bed with him and the cycle started again and the guiltwas everywhere, greasy and thick, and Ada couldn’t getaway.Eventually, Ewan was the one who ended it.“I can’t do this anymore,” he said. “I can’t be with youanymore. She makes me happy.”For the first time, I let Ada cry in front of him. I watchedher sob into his shoulder, into the soft cotton of his T-shirt.She didn’t beg him; she didn’t ask for anything. Ewan heldher and touched her face gently.“Why do you have to be so beautiful?” he whispered.Ada cried herself to sleep, her face pressed into hischest. She woke up briefly to see Ewan watching hersleep, his hand playing in the curls of her hair, his eyessoft.*Ada graduated college a few weeks later with Catia andMalena and Luka and most of her friends. Saachi flew upfor it with A uli and Chima, and the whole time, Ada wasunsettled and shaking. I had to keep her face smooth sothat her human family wouldn’t see any of the stormwithin. Saachi was demanding her time, too much of it,considering that Ada was about to lose all her friends andthere was barely any time to say good-bye.“We came all the way here,” Saachi told her. “The leastyou can do is spend time with us.”None of it fucking mattered, honestly. Ada and I had lostEwan. Since the night he’d rejected us, I’d slept with himonce, a final time before Ada’s graduation. He and I werein her room, on the raised bed, moonlight spitting throughthe glass of her window. Ewan was drunk and high, backfrom a night of bad decisions that ended, as usual, withhim looking for Ada and fucking me. He wrenched her hairuntil her neck and spine cracked loudly, and when wewere face to face, I found myself opening Ada’s mouth andsaying the same words Soren once told her.“I fucking love you,” I said.Ewan kept thrusting, pounding in the dark, and when hespoke, his voice was a stranger’s, slurred and hard.“Shut the fuck up,” he said.I swear, I never felt more stupid and useless than I didin that moment; like I was some whore he was justdumping into. Ada knew how Ewan was when he wasdrunk and high, when he pissed on coffee tables, when hecouldn’t remember a thing that he’d done or said—whichwas the case this time. He went back to himself in the daysafterward, but it didn’t matter. He had already insultedme, and wallahi, I was unforgiving and petty andvindictive. Don’t expect anything else from an ọgbanje.I targeted one of Ewan’s friends on the tennis team, aboy who had always seemed to hate Ada, but I could seehim and I could smell the truth. Ada was a beautiful girland this friend had to watch her, knowing that Ewan got tofuck her and he didn’t. He was human. There was bound tobe desire lying under his hatred—there always is. So it waseasy to take him home at the end of one night, and ofcourse he agreed. He kissed me and sank his fingers intoAda’s body before coming with my hand wrapped aroundhim. I kicked him out of Ada’s room as soon as we weredone and turned inward.“Really?” said Ada. She was folding her arms andleaning against the marble, her eyes red from crying overEwan. “His friend?”“And so?” I answered. “Ewan won’t care. He let us go,remember? He doesn’t love us. He made that fuckingclear.”Ada winced and looked away. I came close to her andran my hand along her cheek.“Don’t worry,” I whispered. “Fine girl. There are otherswho will want us, who I can make want us. It’s easy.”I had her put her pain with me because I could use it asfuel, I could do things with it that she couldn’t. Likefucking one of the track runners, a boy with a silkenSouthern drawl and hooded eyes that dripped sex from thelashes. Trust me, I didn’t need Ewan, and if Ada thoughtshe did, I would make her forget. There were many, manyother things we could be doing.Saachi and Chima were angry because Ada insisted onflying to Georgia to spend a month with her friend Itohan,instead of coming straight to Saachi’s house with them. Ididn’t give a shit about their anger—mine was much largerand stronger. Except for A uli, they’d soured thegraduation for Ada, keeping her from her friends, thepeople who really knew what was going on in her life. Shedidn’t know when she’d see Malena or Catia again. Lukawas going back to Serbia. Axel and Denis were going toIceland to coach volleyball, Juan was going back to Mexico.The house at the bottom of the hill was going to be empty.We had lost Ewan. Ada was devastated, but I had workto do, so we went to Georgia.*It felt strange to be back there. Things there were thesame, but everything for Ada and I was completelydifferent because we’d just spent a whole year with Ewan.I was done with him. I wanted him out of Ada’s head and Iwanted her to stop loving him. I was furious. I wanted anew toy and I already knew I was going to play rough. It’snot as if there was gentleness in me to start with. I washungry and I was hunting. I couldn’t stop myself and Ididn’t want to—the whole point of my existence was to runwild and tear whoever fell into my mouth into pieces. Ipicked Itohan’s other brother, the older one. I startedgrooming him, which was easy because he and Ada wereclose, and after about a week or two of this, Itohan pulledAda aside, saying they needed to talk.“What’s up?” Ada asked, her face open and friendly. Ilurked behind it, as usual.“I know you don’t know how it looks,” Itohan said, herlong hair roughly pushed behind an ear, her lipstick matteand red. “When you and him are hanging out upstairs andthe rest of us are downstairs.”“He was just showing me his books,” Ada said, and Ifought to keep from laughing out of her mouth.“I know.” Itohan kept her voice friendly. “But it’s justsomehow when you and him are alone in his roomtogether.”She smiled, trying to be kind. Inside the marble room, Ilet out a shriek of laughter and Ada kicked me in the shin,hissing at me to shut up. On her face, she was maintaininga worried and slightly scared frown for Itohan’s benefit.“I know it’s not intentional,” Itohan was saying, “but justthink about how it looks, okay? You two can’t date, notafter you dated my younger brother.”The marble suddenly felt cold around me. “Wow,” I said,my laughter fading. “She really thinks we don’t know whatwe’re doing.”“Good,” muttered Ada. “Lucky for me.”I couldn’t fucking believe it. They still saw only Ada;they still gave her the benefit of the doubt even whenyou’d have to be an idiot not to realize how it looked, asItohan put it. It was amazing. I had planned every touch ofskin, every coy glance that wove the older brother in, yeteveryone stayed blind. It was as if they were all stuck inthat nice, innocent Christian world Ada used to be a partof, before she was ripped out by my birth. And now, aftereverything that had happened with Ewan, there wasabsolutely no way Ada could return. She was an imposter;she was now me. I’d contaminated her too much—we haddone too much together.So she and I nodded obediently at Itohan, but I had nointention of stopping. What for? I wasn’t finished with theolder brother, not yet. I had spent weeks trying to crackhim open the way I wanted. I played soft and sweet, Ipretended to be Ada since she was the one he loved. Ibrushed her fingertips over the back of his hand as hedrove and gave him shy smiles till we were alone, and thenI slid my palms over his jeans, but he stopped me. Maybehe could smell the difference between her and me,between the grassy lemon of her and my coppered scent. Idon’t know what it was—maybe he just knew her wellenough to know who I wasn’t. But he wouldn’t surrenderand it made me angry. I told him I loved him and he stillwouldn’t surrender, he wouldn’t let me touch him. I hadarrived in Georgia wrapped in a red rage, and after Ewan,this second refusal blinded me with fury. He denied me athis own risk.So the night before Ada was leaving, I slid her out of theguest room and into the younger brother’s room. He wasthe type I knew, easy and predictable. I fucked him withAda’s body, with his older brother in the next room, asleepand still in love with Ada, with their mother down the hallnext to her Bible. The next morning, I sat the older brotherdown and pretended to be Ada and told him that she hadnever loved him, a trick I learned from Soren. I watchedhis heart crack and fall into shimmering pieces of dust,and it was good, it felt correct. This was the lesson: I canfuck you or I can fuck you up—simple.After I hurt him, he still got up and drove Ada to theairport. You see, what I realized later was that he wasn’tlike the others I targeted. He was gentle; he didn’t deserveto be punished. But we had lost Ewan and I was there andI was born into what I was born into. I have always been aweapon and I am not obliged to be fair. My only mistakewas that I forgot one small detail: Ada did love the olderbrother. Very much, in fact.I didn’t know it at the time, but I had gone too far.Chapter ElevenYou will always be in the process of change because every time youget born into a basilisk, that basilisk consumes itself so you can beborn into another basilisk.WeAsụghara could not be left alone; that would be unnatural.When something stands, something else stands beside it.So on the day she was born in Virginia, there was anotherone born with her as she tore through that window. Hisname was Saint Vincent, because when he sloughed offAsụghara’s side, he fell with holiness on his hands.The Ada named him and he remained in the marble ofher mind because he couldn’t survive her body. SaintVincent was long fingered and cool, with slow andsimmering hungers. He was strange; we could never quiteplace him, where his parts came from. He was notexpected to come through the window, but he did and sohe was born in a portal, a son of flux space. What we meanis that he was not godspawn like Asụghara. He belongednowhere, except maybe to the Ada. He was gentle, soft asa ghost. That was good—he was no threat to Asụghara, hewould not compete with her for control.No, Saint Vincent preferred to move inside the Ada’sdreams, when she was floating in our realm, untetheredand malleable. He molded her into a new body there, adreambody with reorganized flesh and a penis completewith functioning nerves and expanding blood vessels,tautening easily into an erection. Even Asụghara wasimpressed; she couldn’t mold or build in our realm the waythat he could. Saint Vincent used the dreambody as his. Hewove other bodies in our realm for him to ride, for him toplace astride his hips, swallowing him up. When he came,his pleasure was a concentrated burst of light, anchoredand distilled in his groin. It was different from whatAsụghara experienced with the Ada’s body—those orgasmswould spread in a diffuse wash that drowned her. Thisseparation of pleasures was good: Saint Vincent stayed inour realm and in the marble of the Ada’s mind, whileAsụghara met him in the marble but moved in the flesh.He was no less holy for the things he did with thedream-body—you must understand that we see holy asremoved from flesh and therefore purer. Saint Vincent wasuncontaminated, quarantined, even. Perhaps in anotherworld, where the Ada was not split and segmented, sheand Saint Vincent might have been one thing together.After all, she was always being mistaken for a boy whenshe was a child, when her hair was short for the first time.Perhaps he had been there all along and we just nevernoticed, we were so young.The Ada had liked being seen as a boy. She felt like itfit, or at least the misfit of it fit, the wrongness was right.She was perhaps eleven years old then. Her chest was flat,her hips were narrow, her hair was short, and there musthave been something about her face that wasn’t delicateenough. When she went swimming at the local sports clubwith Lisa, adults would stop her in the women’s changingroom.“Why are you in here?” they’d ask, or, “Why are youwearing a girl’s swimsuit?”The Ada felt like a trickster, which felt right. She couldmove between boy and girl, which was a freedom, for herand for us. But when she turned twelve and startedbleeding, everything was ruined. The hormones redid herbody, remaking it without consent from us or the Ada. Wewere distressed at this re-forming of our vessel, very muchso, because it was nothing other than a cruel reminderthat we were now flesh, that we could not control ourform, that we were in a cage that obeyed other laws,human laws. We had no choice in this warping, thisunnatural maturing. There was blackish blood, a swellingchest, hair sprouting like an evil forest. It pushed us into aspace we hated, a marked plane that was too clear and toowrong.Around that time, one afternoon, the Ada was walkingdown the road with her cousin Obiageli. The Ada saidsomething rude, a touch insolent, and Obiageli reacted byreaching out and poking her finger into the Ada’s chest,right in her new breasts.“Because you have these apples now, ehn? That’s whyyou’re talking like that?” Obiageli chuckled at the Ada’sshocked face and kept walking.Inside the Ada, we shuddered and retched from thattouch, turning her stomach over. The quick revulsionwouldn’t go away. We were loud and kicking against thismeatbody we’d been shoved into; we wanted to be let out,this was an abomination. But the Ada had learned her trickof quick sacrifices just that year, so when they got back tothe house, she cut into the back of her hand and bled usinto a restless silence. She would continue, if youremember, for another twelve years, but back then waswhen she learned that the sacrifices worked, that usingblood could make existence bearable, at least for a littlewhile.She tried to make us comfortable, as if in apology forher bleeding and bulging body; she dug into Saul’s oldsuitcases and found his shirts from when he lived inLondon, button-downs that were too big for her, which wasperfect. The Ada covered her new body in flowered redpolyester and crisp green cotton, hiding it away. She woreloose cargo trousers in army green with seven deeppockets, until the cuffs tore and frayed. When sheoverheard one of her classmates describe her as busty, shedecided it was not real. It felt like he was talking aboutsomeone else.All of this is to say that everything has existed inanother form prior to its current one, so when SaintVincent showed up, the Ada was not surprised. Shewelcomed his delicate masculinity arranging itself in foldsinside her; she welcomed his company because she was, ofcourse, always lonely. It brought her a small amount ofgrief when she realized that he was restricted to usingonly a dreambody because hers was simply wrong. Herbody worked for Asụghara, but Saint Vincent would beneutered within it, with nothing weighing down betweenhis legs, just canals lined in velveteen. His hungers weredifferent, but simple. Saint Vincent wanted the soft nape ofa girl’s neck against his mouth and he wanted it enoughthat the Ada went to get it for him.It was a clumsy attempt. The Ada tried to explain theexistence of Saint Vincent to one of her college friendswho he found beautiful, but this was the Ada and she wasnot Asụghara, she did not have that silken charm. So theconversation was awkward, and as the Ada spoke thewords exposing Saint Vincent’s existence and desires, sheknew it sounded crazy; you could not put him into a mouthand expect it to sound sane. Her beautiful friend was politebut uninterested, and she turned the Ada down. It shouldnot have been surprising, yet the Ada found herselfretreating inside her mind, humiliated by this rejection,confused and hurt.“Stupid, stupid, stupid,” she muttered to herself as shepaced around the marble. “Of course she doesn’t want you.Who would?”“It’s enough.” Asụghara stepped in and grabbed theAda’s arms, pinning them at her sides, leaning herforehead against the Ada’s. “You tried. It’s enough. Wewon’t tell anyone about him ever again, you hear? We’llkeep him in here. No one except us can understand.”Teary-eyed, the Ada nodded, and just like that, SaintVincent became a secret buried in the marble. Perhaps it isnot how we would have done things, but as we said, thebeastself was running things and she thought it was forthe best. It was how she moved; she pushed them back andhid them in the marble in order to protect them—first theAda, and now Saint Vincent. Asụghara was the blade,forever flirting with the softness of people’s throats. Theywere balanced now—the Ada, her little beast, and her saint—the three of them locked in marbled flesh, burningthrough the world.But no matter what skins they shed in this foreigncountry, we remembered where they came from and weremembered the first mother. Ala is all earth, no matterthe oceans; the Ada was still walking on soil that belongedto her mother. Even her flesh belonged to Ala, for, as wehave said, it is on her lips that humans are born, and therethey live until they die. We were still her children, distilledinto tripled hatchlings. Otu nne na-amụ, mana ọ bụghị otuchi na-eke. And to be named is to gain power, let alone tobe named thrice over. Our heat was building, spillingthrough the gates, calling the others, pulling them like asun with weight. We should have known, we should havebeen warned—the children of our mother do not forgetpacts and their oaths taste of anger and alligator pepper.They were gathering in rain clouds, their voices distantand dreamlike, but grating like torn metal.You are looking for our trouble, they sang. Gin spilled onthe soil, blood wiped over clay, and they spoke in a legionof voices.What are you going to do when we come?Chapter TwelveI can die today, I can die tomorrow.AsụgharaI heard the clacking first.It was rhythmic and regular, bouncing off the walls anddomed ceilings of Ada’s mind. “Stop it, Vincent,” I said, notturning around. “I don’t like that sound.” Sometimes hegot restless and did things that irritated the hell out of me,like whistling ghost-birds across the ceiling or turning themarble into a maze of crying walls. I wasn’t in the moodfor another of his games. I had been having a quietmorning standing at Ada’s eyes, not really doing anything,just looking out into her world.The clacking continued, and under it I could hear a softbrushing that made my bones start to itch. That wasdefinitely not Vincent. I turned around with my fingernailsbiting into my palms and I saw the first one. It was movingacross the floor toward me, wearing a hooded bodysuitwoven from twisted raffia that had been dyed red andblack and fringed with grass at the wrists and ankles. Itwas clacking with its carved teeth, low to the floor,sweeping its legs out in wide circles.I took a step back. “Who the fuck are you?”The thing laughed, like rattling fingers. Eh henh, it said.We knew you would forget, nwanne anyị.The hair on the back of my neck went taut and electric. Iknew that voice from somewhere. The thing stoppedmoving and unfolded itself upright. A hole opened in itschest. Xylophone music hammered out and the secondthing tumbled forward from inside it. This one looked likea young girl, short hair stained with camwood, skin dustedwith nzu, coral slings over the chest. It sprang up andlaughed at me.See your face, it said. Were you not expecting us? Afteryou went and became just one, by yourself! It danced ashort burst to the xylophone music still spilling from thefirst one.Oh, I realized, of course. I should have recognized them—the brothersisters, children of our first mother, ndị otu.A spike of exhilaration shot up through me and I laughed.These were the mischief-makers, you see, the tricksters;they were like me. They didn’t give a shit about humans,they enjoyed causing pain—they were me and I was them.It was the best visit I’d ever had in the marble, a thousandtimes better than having Yshwa show up with hissanctimonious nonsense.The first one scratched the raised black spots on thesides of its mask-face, slowly rotating its head all the wayaround like an owl, following me as I walked around them.“Okay,” I said. “No wahala. So it’s now you decided tocome?”Come, come and see, come and see you, little animal.The second one had a lighter voice, like thin metal. Littleevil of the forest.The first one was chains dragging on broken shells. Yeso, come and see you, see if you know who your people are.Who you belong to, chimed the second one.The first nodded. What you smell like.I stopped walking. “And what do I smell like?” I asked.The second brothersister curled its mouth up till the lipsalmost touched its nose.Like flesh, it spat. Bad flesh.That annoyed me. “I didn’t ask to be put here,” I pointedout.‘I didn’t ask to be put here,’ mocked the first. And whatare you doing about it? It’s like you like it.We don’t like it, said the second. Who told you to comehere?The first answer that came to mind was Ada. That shewas the one who called me and I came for her. Instead, Ishrugged. “I already told you, I didn’t ask for it.”Who told you to stay here? You don’t know road again?“Road to where?”The second one shook its head and turned away,hissing. The first one sighed and lunged toward me,flicking the grass cuff of its wrist on my face. It’s like youwent and forgot everything, it said.Its touch was like a machete running me through. Iwrapped my arms around my stomach, shocked. Pain wasnot a feeling I was familiar with—that was Ada’s thing, notmine. Everything around us slowed down. I could see dustlightly sifting through the air, settling on the marble andthe creases of my skin. The two of them smelled strange,like hope, like something fucking with the fine edges of mymemory, something I was hungry for but couldn’tremember the taste of. It hurt. I felt tears fill my eyes and Idoubled up, trying to fight it. I didn’t want to cry in front ofthem. The second one turned back to me and reached outits arm, holding a sheaf of young palm fronds. It brushedthe bruisable green against my skin, from my forehead tomy chin, and smiled, its teeth filed sharp.Yes, it said softly. It pains like that. Imagine how therest of us feel, twenty-times-twenty times worse than that,since you went, since you did not come back. Imagine,watching you stay on this side, away from us, watching youand watching you, and now you smell different, so we said,‘Let us come.’Still bad flesh, marked the first. But different.The second brushed my face again and I closed my eyes.Do you know who your people are?The first leaned forward with its mouth full of shards.Are you remembering yet?My skin readjusted slightly. “I never forgot,” Iwhispered, and somehow, I wasn’t lying.Eziokwu? It dragged its voice sarcastically. Who areyour people?Goose bumps rippled over my skin. “You,” I said.Is that so? They were testing, teasing.I opened my eyes and put some irritation into my voice.“Who else?”They spun in small, precise circles.Ask us, they said. It was rhetorical. Maybe you think thesmall girl and those humans are your people.I thought about it. I had come for Ada. I had stayed forAda. I loved her and they knew I loved her. Still, I shookmy head. “No, I don’t belong. I know I don’t belong.”They clucked in mock pity and the first one ran its grasscuff under my chin. It tickled and I moved my face away.The second one squatted and its coral slings drummedagainst each other.Are you not hungry to go home?The machete twisted as they said that, opening a caveinside me. I felt like I was starving, being eaten up bymyself. I couldn’t tell if it was real or them.“Yes,” I choked out. The dust in the air seemed to shine.My knees softened and they helped me to the floor. Myweakness terrified me. I held so much power in Ada’sworld, you see, but in here, with them, I could feel theirage press on me. They were older than even Yshwa, old asforever, born of the first mother. Here, with them, I bent.Do you remember the pact?Their faces were like skies above me. I felt the marbleon the back of my skull and shook my head. All I couldremember was bits of red dust and masks, fragments ofthat first day when we, the larger of me, started to wakeup. The gold pins I had been wearing in my hair crawledaway, spreading curls over the floor like a black stain. Itwas becoming hard to think—they had muddied the air;they had slowed my mouth and blood.She doesn’t remember anything, the second one sang tothe first. She’s been wiped clean.She doesn’t remember the basking, the twenty days,agreed the first.“What twenty days?” I asked. My head was swimming.After our mother shed, twenty days, and then we werelaid.The second one laid its body down next to me, coralswooping to the floor. Encased in soft white, veins formingfirst, it said. You don’t remember. This is your hatchingstory.In the heat, the first one added as it hooked its handsunder my armpits, dragging me to my feet. Ngwa, stand upand remember.I staggered and tried to clear my head. The smallersecond one looked up at me, its face pensive.We lay against each other before we were even whole, itsaid. It floated up as though pushed by a breeze andswayed, closing its eyes.The first one pulled its grass-fringed hands from mybody, leaving me standing there like a lost tree.Touch her, it said. Let her know again.The second one danced forward on its toes, stretched itswhite-dusted finger and pressed it to the center of mychest. My sternum collapsed and turned me inside out, andsuddenly I was somewhere dark. I could see nothing, yetan overwhelming presence was around me. It felt likemillions of eyes looking at me, like I was stripped downand I couldn’t see anyone who could see me, like they wereeating me up and my mouth was gagged. I startedpanicking, my face sealed shut, I couldn’t even flail theway I wanted to, and then I was back in the marble,gasping, leaning against the twisted raffia of the first one.It smelled like smoke and palm wine.I stumbled away from it, retching. “What the fuck didyou do? What happened?”They seemed undisturbed. It has been a very long timesince you were back with us. The list against you continuesto grow.Nke mbu, you crossed over and broke your gates.“It wasn’t me,” I said. “I don’t know what happened.”If you don’t know what happened, how do you know itwasn’t you?You always like to blame someone else.“You’re seriously trying to blame the gates on me?” Iwanted to hear them accuse me directly, but they evaded.Are they not your gates?“I didn’t fucking break them! You think I wanted to endup like this?”Somebody broke them. You’re the one who passedthrough.I hissed at them. “That just means you don’t know whofucked up the gates. I’m not going to take responsibilityfor something I didn’t do. Forget that nonsense.”They smelled irritated. Spots were dancing in my eyes.The second thing is that you didn’t come backimmediately.“How was I supposed to do that? I’m only one, in caseyou forgot. I wasn’t even there.”You were there. The bigger you. You can tell the rest ofthem for us.The third thing is that you crossed an ocean and youwent far away and you didn’t listen to us.No, the fourth thing is that you didn’t listen to us.I pressed my hands to my head. “Chineke. You’ve beenholding these grudges all this time? That’s what you camehere for?”The first brothersister scratched its spots again andswiveled its neck. The second one tapped out a patternwith its heels on the marble and it echoed. The duststopped moving.Look, said the second one eventually. We can leave you,nsogbu adịghị, but we are not the only ones.The first one scoffed. We are not even the angry ones.My dizziness was leaving. I shook off the rest of it andglared at them. “Tell me why you really came here,” I said.They looked at each other, then turned to me, movinglike twins.Come back, they said. Listen to us this time. Theypressed on either side of me and pulled me over, back totheir memories of the other side beyond the gates, of whatused to be mine too, the solid comfort, the thousand-souledother brothersisters all folded against each other, neveralone, as alone as you could want to be—anything,everything we ever wanted, even nothingness, if we chosethat, even ends. I started crying at the freedom of it all, atwhat they had given back to me—these memories of a timebefore the shell-blue walls in Umuahia. When they steppedaway, I fell to the floor.I was still lying on the veined marble when they startedto disappear, their voices grating against each other.Come back.There is still time. The Obi may kneel down, but it nevercrumbles.The way up is the way down. This is your last warning.I kept crying for a while after they were gone, until I gottired of it and stopped. The marble had warmed up and Icould almost feel Ada’s pulse through it. It was strange—Ithought that I would feel drained but it was the opposite. Ifelt full of a rich and thick power. It tasted like if youroasted blood with salt and capped it in a jar, cooked withit, seasoned meat with it, fed it to your lovers rare, red ontrembling fingers. I suppose that’s what having yourmemories back will do to you. I was still trapped here, Iknew that, but I was not empty-handed. To have a body towork with is no joke. I had all this room under Ada’s warmand nervous skin, and not only that, but I had all her bonestoo, hinged together, down to the marrow. Even there, Ihad the marrowspace, those little air pockets between thesecret flesh, the flesh inside the enamel.I had been playing with Ada all this time, just littlegames, but even those can be done with much power. Afterall, was I not the hunger in Ada? I was made out of desire,I tasted of it, I filled her up with it and choked her, lyingover her like a killing cloud, soft and unstoppable, all theweight of a wet sky. My power was so absolute that shecouldn’t tell where she was and it didn’t matter—it was areminder that I was there. I wanted her to know me welland never feel alone, to always remember that no onecould fuck her up as well as me, no one could get her ashigh as I could. Ada could pretend as if she hated me, butyou can’t hide the truth. I felt how tightly she held me,how she didn’t want to come down or let me go, how shedidn’t care about the cold or the pain because she had me,and wallahi, I was better than drugs, better than alcohol;she was never sober with me. I was the best high, thefastest, most reliable dealer, the best beast. Why wouldAda ever want to wake up from me? Even when shecouldn’t cut her skin anymore, I was sharp enough to do itfrom the inside because we both knew the sacrifices couldnever stop.After the brothersisters visited me, my purpose becameclear. My existence was offering Ada a temporary solution,you see, but they’d reminded me that there was anotheroption, and the best part was that I could do both things—Icould honor the oath while protecting Ada. It was perfect.She was me and I was her, so by returning to the otherside, I would be taking her away from this useless humanrealm, and what better protection could I offer her, really?I had done what I could so far, with the boys and thedrinking and the fucking, but I could do better. I could bebetter. I could change Ada’s world. We could all go home.ỊLAGHACHỊ(To Return)Chapter ThirteenDo not hang your heart on me.AsụgharaWe had settled into a rhythm by now. Even though Adanamed us, I think she was surprised at how quickly SaintVincent and I took on these names, how distinct webecame. She wasn’t sure if we were real, but nothingabout us felt false. I told her to keep us inside her head, inthe marble room, so that no one could see us. Theywould’ve told Ada that she was crazy or that we weren’treal, and I couldn’t allow those lies. I had to protect us.When I made Ada do things she didn’t want to, I wasn’tdoing it to be cruel. The whole is greater than theindividual.So when she started looking up her “symptoms,” it feltlike a betrayal—like she thought we were abnormal. Howcan, when we were her and she was us? I watched her tryto tell people about us and I smiled when they told her thatit was normal to have different parts of yourself. “You’rejust like everyone else,” they said, because they were justlike everyone else; like Itohan’s family, they couldn’t seethe kind of thing Ada had become.“It’s fine,” I said to a worried Vincent. “Let her play thisstupid game.” Eventually Ada would realize what I’d beentelling her: she didn’t need people to understand; she onlyneeded us. I let her read up on personality disorders, andonce in a while, I’d tell her to stop looking, even though Iknew she wouldn’t listen.Ada wanted a reason, a better explanation. We were notenough. We were too strange. She had been raised byhumans, medical ones at that. So instead she read lists ofdiagnostic criteria, things like disruption of identity, selfdamagingimpulsivity, emotional instability and moodswings, self-mutilating behavior and recurrent suicidalbehavior. I could have told her it was all me, even that lastone. Especially that last one. Maybe all her research wasdone in self-preservation, because she didn’t trust me tosave her. I wanted her to die, yes, but like I said before,everything I did was in our best interests. I was just tryingto save her.And for the record, she was the one who tried to kill mefirst.*It’s fine if I seem selfish, running through the world with abody that didn’t really belong to me. But I was considerate,even when I didn’t have to be. Take, for instance, the kindof men I allowed to touch Ada’s body. Some of themwanted Ada, not me, so I removed them because it wasimpossible—in those sweaty moments, there was only me.The gentle ones were useless. They would touch Ada’sbody as if she was made of spun sugar, brittle like Saachi’steeth, stretched like Saul’s temper. Let me tell you thetruth about men like that—they want soft moons. Theywant women with just enough crescent to provide asufficient edge, tender little slivers of light that they canbring home to their mothers. Like I said, useless. I didn’twant them near me. After what happened with Itohan’solder brother, I had learned what I could do to men likethat, and it was better for them to just lock their doorsagainst me, because I was coming over the hill like amonster.I allowed myself to love Ewan, even though he washuman, because I thought, well, this one can handle me.He is a liar and a cheat after all, he even deserves me. Butafter he walked away, and after Itohan’s brothers, I onlyhunted cruel men, men who also cheated and lied, whobroke things with the selfishness of their hands. They wereviolent in bed—they knew how to fuck me as if I was madeof rage and metal. It felt as if they could seize the sky andforce it to its knees. I wanted to lock myself in with themand run out of air, to be loved like the weapon I was, to liein bruises like a monster.In retrospect, it is not surprising that Ada tried to killme then. I had dragged her through unprecedented filth inthe name of protection.“I don’t know what it’ll take,” she told me, when wewere both standing in the marble room. “Therapy,probably. But I can’t do this anymore. I need you gone.”I was manifesting strongly that day, wearing her face,but with sharper cheekbones and fuller lips. Saint Vincentwatched us with his eyelids drooping.Ada twisted her hands. “I’m trying to do what’s best forme,” she said.“What do you think I’ve been doing this whole time?” Isnapped. “What do you think I was doing when I camethrough Soren’s window in the first place?” I watched asshe winced and looked away. “You see? It’s like you’reforgetting I’m the only one who protected you.”“I’m trying to protect myself now,” she said, and I did adouble take.“From who?” I was starting to see red, the mother colorcrawling over my eyes. “From me? You want to protectyourself from me?” I didn’t realize I had stepped forwarduntil she backed away. Vincent sat up, purple shadowsunder his eyes.“Asụghara, she didn’t mean it like that.”I took another step until my mouth was by Ada’s ear. Iwas taller than her, stronger than her. “Of course not. Howcan? When I’ve been the one holding her together? Shecan’t have meant it like that. She would have to be mad tosay something that fucking stupid.”Ada’s eyes were filling with angry tears. “I’m notstupid,” she bit out, and she sounded like a child filled withhurt.I cupped her face in my hand and my fingernails weregolden against her skin.“Of course not,” I said, softening my voice. “But you’renot a fighter, Ada. All these men just want to fuck you, andit’s my job to be there. Allow me to be strong for you.” Ileaned my forehead against hers, but Ada pulled away.“You weren’t strong enough to ever say no,” she said,and if she had said it gently, it would have been one thing,but she said it with cruelty and she sounded like me. Istepped back and tasted fresh anger inside my mouth.“Fuck you,” I said. “You know who I am, you know whatI have to do. I don’t have a choice.”“Are you mad? I’m the one without a choice!” Adashoved me and I staggered back. “Not you, me! You’re justselfish!”“Me, selfish? I’m doing all of this for you.”“Oh my god.” Ada put her hands over her face andpaced around the marble. “You don’t do it for me,Asụghara, you do it because you like it.”I stared at her. “What?”“I was there too, remember? Itohan’s older brother?”She turned back to face me. “You enjoyed hurting him,even though he didn’t do anything to us. You thought itwas funny.”I looked at the contempt on her face and felt myselfcalming. What was I doing, begging a human not to banishme from flesh? As if she could even do it. I walked awayand sat down next to Vincent, then I tried to reason withthe girl.“Everything we do is a weapon, Ada, you get it? Youthink no one has ever seen our pain and laughed before?Don’t be ridiculous. They do it to us, we do it to them.Simple.”Saint Vincent loosened the collar of his shirt and lit acigarette. He smelled like Ewan. Ada leaned against thewall and folded her arms.“I don’t need to do that anymore,” she said. “I don’tneed you anymore.”“Is that so?” I narrowed my eyes against the smoke fromVincent’s mouth. “Who will you need now? Yshwa, the onewho gives you nothing?”Ada glared at me and I took the cigarette from Vincent.He walked over to her, pulling her into his arms.“Asụghara loves you,” he said, as if I couldn’t hear him.“She just doesn’t want to leave you alone.”I threw my middle finger up at them and blew a veil ofsmoke in front of my face. Ada shook her head at me.“You’re hurting people I love, don’t you understand?”she said. “I can’t just fold my hands and watch you do it.”“You’re doing this for them?” I put out the cigarette.Maybe she didn’t understand. “They deserved it, Ada. Allof them deserved it for what we went through.”“Come on, that’s not true,” she said. “Even the ones whodidn’t have anything to do with it? Even the innocentones?”When I heard her say that, something broke inside me.“Were we not innocent?” I shouted, my voice slammingagainst the marble and splintering it. Cracks ran throughthe walls and ceiling, and Ada and Vincent froze wherethey were standing. All I could see was the mother color.“Were we not innocent enough to be spared?!”They continued staring at me.“No? Okay then, so tell me, why should I spare them?”The room fell silent and I saw Vincent’s tears first, but Ididn’t realize I was crying until Ada came up to me andwiped my face gently. “I didn’t realize. I’m so sorry,” shewhispered, as if she wasn’t the victim. “I’m so sorry theyhurt you too.”I didn’t want her pity. “I’m not going anywhere,” I toldher, pulling away from her hands. What could she do? Iwas stronger than her; this marble was my realm morethan it was hers. So I made myself bigger and bigger, andshe was saying something but her voice was small andtiny, and I was pressed up against the walls of her mind,growing and growing until she was a dot in a corner and Icouldn’t hear her voice anymore.*Look, I was a hungry shade, nothing more. I latched ontothe men, and their energy felt like sticky fruit slidingbetween my fingers, and when we were done, I was stillhungry. And after the next time, I was still hungry. Andafter the one after that one, I was still hungry. I wouldhave drowned them all. I would have inched slowly overtheir bodies, dipped my fingers inside their throats andripped out sounds. I filled their beds with secrets. Ada wasright—I found pleasure in evil. I did many things in hungerthat could be misconstrued.Chapter FourteenEbe onye dara, ka chi ya kwatụrụ ya.AsụgharaAs far as I’m concerned, I have been loyal, both to Ada andthe brothersisters. When Ada tried to look for help, I didmany things to stop it because she was mine, but believeme, I never wanted her to feel alone. After she tried to killme and failed, Ada gave up. I didn’t enjoy winning thatfight. There’s no delight in watching her crumble—that’sonly fun when it happens to other people. Saint Vincentand I tried to make a home for Ada in her mind, and thatmeant something, at least to me. You don’t know what it’slike to share a life and a body, to watch the days andmonths and years drag by, the people who came in andrevolved out, to watch Ada try and get away from us, tosee her fail, to see the way she came to love us better,eventually.I even finally allowed Ada to see her therapists, sinceshe was being so stubborn about it. I remember onesession with a middle-aged woman who had gray streaks inher hair. Ada was sitting there, rubbing the back of her lefthand with her right one, tracing the tendon that led to hermiddle finger, running her fingertips lightly over it untilshe felt it roll under and across. This was something shedid often, just to remind herself that she had a physicalbody. She was also talking to herself in her head, and Icould hear the forced calm that she was injecting into hervoice.“It’s okay, baby, you’re fine. It’s only an hour, then wecan go. We’re fine, baby, it’s okay.”The woman with the streaked hair was talking, but Adahad stopped listening. I looked around the office,wondering how many times we’d been here. I didn’t alwaysfollow what Ada had been up to, so things easily slipped byme when I wasn’t paying attention.“Do you have any questions?” the woman asked.“Comments? Concerns?”“None,” said Ada.The therapist made a note, her pen scratching quietly.“How do you feel about your future?” she asked.Without thinking, Ada let the truth slip out.“Indifferent.”The therapist’s face sharpened. “Could you elaborate onthat a bit more? When you think about the future, exactlywhat emotions come up for you?”Ada shrugged. “Indifference.”The therapist continued pushing, and as she spoke, Adakept blanking out midway through the woman’s sentences,then returning. The therapist asked the same things overand over, rephrasing them as if Ada wouldn’t notice. But itdidn’t matter how many ways she twisted the questions,Ada had no answers.“What about Asụghara?” the woman asked, andsuddenly I was paying all the attention I had in the world.“How the fuck does she know my name?” I hissed atAda, but she ignored me.“Are there any more of them?” continued the therapist,and I watched Ada with my breath held. I could tell thatshe didn’t want to lie. She’d already lied once, when thewoman asked what the suicide plan was, which even Adaknew was a truly stupid question. Why would anyone giveaway a suicide plan—so it could be stopped? Whatnonsense.But I could see that Ada was actually considering tellingthis woman, this complete fucking stranger, about SaintVincent. I reached out across all the marble and pushed athousand spikes into it. The pain would reach Ada,whether she tried to ignoreme or not.“We don’t talk about Vincent,” I reminded her. “Betterkeep your fucking mouth shut.”“I’m not comfortable discussing that,” Ada answeredobediently, and the therapist let it go.For the rest of the session, Ada drew imaginary lines onher temple, pressing her index finger into the skin, thepressure holding her together. She traced her eyebrowsand tried to find words to tell the therapist about thethings I had done to her mind. But I choked up the wordsand made them rot in her throat—there would be noscreaming for help.When Ada finally left the office, I waited until her feethit the stone steps outside before I started shouting.“What the fuck did you think you were doing in there?”“Calm down,” Ada said. “We’re fine. It’s okay.”“It’s not okay! Why did you have to go and talk to thatwoman?”“I was having trouble focusing at school, Asụghara,don’t you remember? I just wanted to get it checked out.”“But that’s not what she was talking about in there. Sheknew my name! What have you been telling her?”“Nothing! Nothing much. She asked a few questions.”I shook my head. The damage was already done; all Icould do was manage it from here. “Well, you don’t need togo back,” I told Ada.She frowned. “The therapist said that sometimes it’sgoing to feel like I don’t need the help. She said I shouldignore that feeling.”I rolled my eyes at her. “Don’t be silly, you can’t ignoreme. I said you’re not going back. Okay?”“Look, I don’t like it either, Asụghara, but I think it’s agood idea to get some help.”“It’s like you’re not hearing me, Ada. I don’t want you tosee her again.”Ada set her jaw, getting ready to answer back, but I’dhad enough of arguing with flesh. I collected power in myhand and ran it across the marble, sending a deep streakof pain through her skull. Ada gasped and clutched herhead, but I didn’t stop. I sank my fists into the marble andsplit her head open with a crashing migraine, and itworked. She never went back to that therapist again.*That was how I kept us all safe, from doctors anddiagnoses and the medications they surely would’veshoved into Ada if they ever saw exactly what her mindlooked like. I needed her to rely on only me, so I could takeher home and we could be with our brothersisters againand it would be as if none of this had ever happened. Theway up is the way down.It’s not easy to persuade a human to end their life—they’re very attached to it, even when it makes themmiserable, and Ada was no different. But it’s not thedecision to cross back that’s difficult; it’s the crossingitself. I had high hopes, sha, since Ada was in a lot of pain.It was always easier to push my agenda when she washurting, and to be fair, she was always hurting, but thisone was different. This one was about Ewan.Ada and Ewan had been on and off since her graduation,instant messaging and e-mailing each other, then finallymeeting up on the coast of Texas, where he pressed heragainst a yellow soft-top Jeep and told her that he’d fallenin love with her from the moment he saw her, all the wayback in that blue room. It was as if he’d forgotten that heleft her in Virginia, back when he’d told her that it was hisgirlfriend who made him happy. Now he was full of freshconfessions.“You’re the woman I’ve dreamed about all my life, butI’ve got nothing to offer you,” he said. He was drunk. “Youdeserve so much more than I can give. You make me feellike I can do anything I dream of.”The wind whipped dust around them. The town theywere in was close to the southern border.“I can’t imagine my life if you’re not in it.”Inside the marble, Ada turned and whispered to me. “Hethinks I’m too good to be true,” she said.“You are,” I answered sourly. I wasn’t going to make themistake of loving Ewan again. She could do it alone if shewanted. Me, I’d been on Skype with one of Ewan’s friendsjust a few weeks before, watching the boy strip off hisclothes, his eyes a narrow and hungry blue. We were inNew Jersey because Ada was visiting some Christianfriends of hers, sitting in the same room as these goodgirls while the boy stroked his erection in the Skypewindow. I kept the laptop screen angled away from themand I thought it was fucking hilarious—they would’ve losttheir minds if they knew what I was looking at. Like mostpeople, they kept thinking that Ada was still just Ada. Ikept my headphones in as he shuddered and moaned,spilling semen over his tight stomach.He and Ewan played tennis together in Texas, so I knewit could only go so far, but still, it was fun to play. I sentthe boy pictures of Ada, her skin bared and brown.“I haven’t been working out as much as I used to,” Iadded.“You have the smoothest body I’ve ever seen,” he said,and that was when I knew I could have him. It wasn’t asurprise—it never is.He was the one who picked Ada up from the airport inTexas and took her to Ewan. He even went out drinkingwith them that night and never mentioned to Ewan any ofthe obscene things he’d said and done over the flattenedglass of a computer screen, all for me. I liked that boy. Hewas a bad person—he was almost as interesting as Soren. Iwould’ve liked to fuck him, but Ada had chosen Ewan andit was impossible to get away.She was na ve, sha. She actually thought things wouldchange after Ewan told her he loved her, but of course,they didn’t. He still had his girlfriend and he acted as if hisconfession by the yellow Jeep never happened. I can say alot about Ada, but even she has limits, so she ended thingswith him and Ewan didn’t fight it. It was their secondbreakup if you count the one in Virginia, and honestly, Iwouldn’t have allowed all this nonsense back and forth if ithad been anyone else. But it was Ewan, and so the wheelkept turning. This time there were no e-mails, there wasno contact, and Ada found herself enveloped by her firstreal heartbreak. I tried to help, to distract her with newlovers, but she was inconsolable. The girl couldn’t evenlisten to most of her music because he’d given it to her andall the songs reminded her of lying in bed with him when itwas winter outside. It was pathetic. I had loved him too, inmy way, but after he left, I knew it had been a mistake.Ewan was just a man, after all, just flesh—selfish andtypical flesh upon that. Besides, he’d mostly been spendingtime with me, not her, and I didn’t expect anyone to beable to see their filthy wants reflected in my eyes and stillstay.In the middle of Ada’s pain, I kept looking for a windowI could use to take her home. She didn’t have the strengthto fight me, and my plan could’ve worked then, except thatone day, Ada got a phone call from a number she didn’trecognize. When she picked up, Ewan’s voice poured intoher ear.“My girlfriend and I broke up,” he told her. “It hadnothing to do with you. But you told me not to come backunless I was single and ready to fight for you, and I am.”I had no chance against that kind of declaration, andwhen I saw the amount of joy having Ewan back brought toAda, I didn’t even want to try. I’m cruel, yes, but I’m notthat cruel. She was happy and he was different. I could tellbecause I didn’t like this version of him. Back in Virginia,Ada never even had his phone number, but this time, Ewanwas calling her every night. He couldn’t sleep withouthearing her voice, he told his mother about her, and whenAda was struggling with her classes, he stayed on thephone with her and told her how much he believed in her.“He’s rebounding,” I told her. “Just wait.”“I know,” Ada said, but she was in love with him. All Icould do was watch.Ewan told her about the holidays before he and thegirlfriend split, when he would go back to Ireland andshow all his friends Ada’s pictures on Facebook. “I toldthem if I wasn’t with my ex, I would marry this girl in aheartbeat.”Ada spoke to him every day and it was all fresh and newand pretty. It made her happy. One night, Ewan askedwhat the worst thing he ever did to her was, and Adawinced at the memory but she told him anyway, about thelast time they slept together in Virginia.“I told you I loved you,” she said. “You told me to shutthe fuck up.”I was surprised to hear her say that—I thought I hadbeen the one who said it, not her. Maybe we were blurringmore than I realized.“It was really shitty,” she was saying. “It made me feel…” She paused. Was there a word to describe thatparticular humiliation?On the other end of the phone line, Ewan spoke into thesilence. “I made you feel cheap,” he said, and then hestarted crying. “That was all you ever asked me for—tonever lie to you and never make you feel cheap. I’m sosorry, Ada.”I listened in amazement as he apologized for all thethings he’d done to her. Ada listened with me, equallysurprised.“Maybe it’s not such a bad idea to love him again,” Isaid to her. “That’s if you want.”Ada tilted her head and listened to him thoughtfully.“Actually,” she said, “I’m not sure.”She kept considering, weighing this new Ewan, andalong the way, he told her that he too had a privaterelationship with Yshwa. I rolled my eyes at this, but Iknew it mattered to Ada, to be with someone who lovedYshwa like she did. That November, Ada flew back to thatlittle Texas border town to spend Thanks-giving withEwan.He was claiming that he’d loved her for a long time, butI knew Ewan. He would never have left the security of hisold relationship if he hadn’t known Ada’s wild love wouldcatch him. It was fine, it was human. No wahala. Besides,he did love her, perhaps with even more abandon than sheloved him because, as he had predicted, she changed hislife. There was no need to pretend with her because Adaalready knew who he was at his worst, so instead Ewantried to show her who he could be at his best. I keptwaiting for his cruel hands, the version of him that I knewand loved, but all he gave Ada was gentleness.The first time she climbed into bed with this new Ewan,Ada reached for me as usual, but for the first time since Ihad thundered through a window to rescue her, I wasn’tthere. I didn’t come.Ewan thrust inside her while Ada held back tears, panicscreaming inside her stomach because it wasn’t supposedto be like that, not with him, not with the one she lovedwho loved her. After he came, Ada started crying.“What’s wrong?” said Ewan, naked and frantic, holdingher as she wept. “What happened?”“They’re not bad tears,” she said, to calm him. “I’venever had sex without a mask on before. There’s alwaysthis other hard layer on top of the real me.” Ada felt crazytrying to describe me and Ewan just held her tighter.“You don’t need a mask,” he said. “I’m not going to hurtyou anymore.”But she was wrong—they were bad tears, they were apanic attack that threw her back into the marble. Insideher head was the only real safety. Ewan was just astranger to us. Vincent placed his hand on the center ofAda’s back as the panic took over her chest.“Breathe,” he said.I stood by, horrified, watching as she wept. She lookedup at me, her eyes reddened.“Where were you?” she gasped, splintering underVincent’s hand, pieces of her crawling on the floor. “Whydid you leave me? You said you would never leave me! Iwas alone!”I continued watching her and all I could think was that Iwas so afraid, and I had never been afraid before. “Icouldn’t find you,” I whispered. “I didn’t know where youwere, Ada, I swear. I couldn’t get to you.”She sobbed against the marble and my heart broke.“Maybe because it was him?” I was guessing. “Maybeyou didn’t even know when you sent me away, but I swear,I didn’t know how to find you.” The guilt was too much.One simple promise—you will never have to feel themmove in you. I will be there. I will be the one they pushinto because they cannot hurt me.And now Ada had gone and fallen in love with a manwho had the power to send me away. He was going todestroy her.“He can’t make us leave,” said Vincent, because hecould see through the back of my open brain. “We’llalways be here with you, Ada. And if we sleep a little morebecause you have him, maybe that’s a good thing. Even ifhe leaves, we’ll be here to pick up your pieces. We’llalways be here, yeah? We promise. Right, Asụghara?”I nodded because my throat was too tight for words.This felt too much like the day I was born, the way she hadbeen entered and hurt.“You’re safe now,” I managed to say. “We’re nevergoing to leave you.”I knelt beside her and held her hand tightly in mine.“Breathe,” said Vincent.*It must’ve gotten better. I don’t remember much—I wassleeping more, just like Vincent had predicted. I was givingAda a life because Ewan made her happy, and honestly,the girl deserved a little happiness. He left Texas andmoved outside Boston to be with her. They got their firstapartment together there. He proposed in a library inCambridge and they got engaged and Saachi was furious,but she thawed after she met him and realized that Adawas going to marry him whether Saachi approved or not.So Saachi flew herself and A uli to Ireland to meet Ewan’sfamily, who was throwing an engagement party for himand Ada. When they returned to the States, Ewan and Adaquietly got married in Manhattan, at City Hall, and Ewanhad tears in his eyes when he said his vows. They moved toBrooklyn, enrolled in graduate school, got a cat and namedit The Prophet Jagger.I left Ada to her new family. When she came to sit withme in the marble, we talked like old friends, as if we’dnever planned to kill each other.“He wants us to be equal,” she told me.I crossed my legs and frowned. “Like how?”Ada blushed. “Like during sex.” I stared and she liftedher shoulders, then dropped them and hugged her knees.“You know, on plain footing. With no one having morepower over the other.”I laughed. “But that’s impossible.”Ada shrugged again and fiddled with a broken nail.“Who knows,” she said.“It doesn’t work like that, Ada, not when the clothescome off.”“You mean, not when you’re there.”Oh. I hadn’t realized I was still helping her with that,but it made sense. I was automatic at that point, a shellshe could drag over her, whether I was asleep or not. “Iguess I’m always there when the clothes come off,” I said.“The promise must be holding.”“Yeah,” she said. “We can’t change that?”I shook my head and took her palm. “You’re just notcapable of it, sorry. Or rather, we’re not capable of it.” Adawatched my nails slide between her fingers as I massagedher hand. All my bones were slightly longer than hers.“How are you?” she asked.I gave her a look. “I’m fine. I come when you need me,like now.”Ada looked a little ashamed. “I’m sorry I haven’t beenaround that much.”“It’s fine,” I said. “As long as you remember that wecan’t be separated, Ada. Without us, you’re nothing—youwon’t feel anything, you won’t see anything, you won’twrite anything. You have to be at peace with us, you hear?We’re you.”“Yeah, I know I have to remember,” she said.“Otherwise I wake up not knowing who I am.”“Exactly.” I patted her hand. “We’re the buffer betweenyou and madness, we’re not the madness.”She nodded. “Where’s Saint Vincent?”“He’s sleeping. Do you want me to call him?”“No, let him rest.” She watched as I cracked herknuckles one by one. “I don’t want to lose you,” she said,her voice small.“Biko, how many times do I have to tell you? We’re notgoing anywhere.” She made a face and I rolled my eyes.“Ada, stop feeling guilty about being happy with Ewan.We’re fine.”She blushed and looked down. “He wants me to givemyself to him completely.”I looked at her, confused. “What?”“Completely. You know. All of me. Like how he’s givenhimself to me.”I didn’t like how she said it, with a tinge of hope, so Itried to be gentle. “Me, I don’t think that’s possible, sha.”“Why not? Isn’t that what you’re supposed to do whenyou’re in love?”I groaned and dropped her hand. “My friend, it hasnothing to do with love.”She frowned. “What is it then?”I looked at her, and I swear, if I could’ve freed Ada rightthen and there to love and be happy and normal, I wouldhave. But I didn’t start any of this and I didn’t know how tostop it, only how to finish it.“What is it?” she demanded.I took a deep breath and hoped for grace. “Look, youcan’t give yourself to him because you’re not yours to give.That’s it. I’m sorry.”It took a minute for Ada to understand, to realize thatshe was locked away, that all those parts of her he wanted,the parts she wanted to give, the parts that wouldcomplete the love they had—all those parts were gone. Orif they weren’t gone, they’d been put somewhere so faraway that not even Ada could touch them, let alone Ewan.I watched her face fall, and when she started crying, I heldher and whispered apologies for what felt like forever.It was only a matter of time after that. Ewan wantedwhat any man in love would: a wife who could withstandtenderness, who didn’t have the core of her locked awayinside a dark ocean. He wanted a soft moon in his handsand he got a scalding sun. Ada didn’t have a choice—shewould have given him everything if she could, just to makehim happy. He had stopped drinking for her, stoppedsmoking, stopped the drugs, everything. But I had madeher a promise and we were both trapped inside it, doomedto play our roles without release. It broke her heart and Icouldn’t stand to see her in so much pain, so I took overand I took her away, because their marriage was burningand I was trying to protect her. It took Ada and I years torealize that I fucked it up, that keeping her walled off fromEwan killed any chance they had at making it out together.By the time Ewan was begging her, she was long gone andI refused him. But honestly speaking, even if she and Ewanhad fought more, they probably still would’ve lost. Theonly thing that could’ve saved them was if I had neverexisted, if Ada was not divided up the way that she was, ifshe had been able to control me. We can stand here andlist impossible things all day long.By the time Ewan moved out of their apartment, he wasdrinking again, smoking packs of cigarettes, and snortingcoke in small bathrooms in the West Village. He droppedout of school, leaving Saachi with a huge loan she’dcosigned for him, and then he fled the country. That waswhen I knew I had been right, that he had been weak thewhole time, that it was a good thing Ada couldn’t giveherself to him, because he would have ruined her; he wasnothing more than a fucking useless human.It was time for me to come back and make it right. I hadlet Ada have her time in the sun. She had known love, shehad tasted happiness, and it had gone bad. That was fine,that was life, abi? No wahala. But I still carried a largertruth, a better truth. It had been good to be flesh. It wouldbe better to go home.Chapter Fifteen‘Nwa anwụna, nwa anwụna’: nwa nwụọ ka anyị mara chi agaghị efo.AdaMy mother does not sleep at night.She worries. This is the way of thingswhen cold gods give you a child.I sleep like swollen opium.She worries. This is the way of things.I went mad so young, you see.Sleeping like swollen opium,screaming on my better days.I went mad too young, you see,they couldn’t wait to ride me.I only scream on my better days,crippled in meat and hot skin.They couldn’t wait to ride me,to drink from my terrible depths.Crippled in meat and hot skin,I tried to die from this body.I drank from my terrible depths,my mother cannot keep me safe.I tried to fly from this body,now clawed shadows follow her.They slaver at the foot of her bed.When cold gods give you their child,make sure you keep her alive.My mother does not sleep at night.Chapter SixteenYour graveyard looks like a festival.AsụgharaAfter Ewan left, I was tired, so I let Saint Vincent step tothe front a little more. He dressed Ada in skinny jeans fromUniqlo, thick cotton T-shirts, and a binder—a tight blackvest that flattened our chest into a soft mound of almostnothing. Saachi was frantic.“You’re in a dark place,” she said over the phone.“You’re unstable.”Ada laughed and ignored her. Saint Vincent went toclubs with satin-padded walls and red velvet curtains,where he kissed women with Ada’s mouth. I calculatedthat if one tablet of the cyclobenzaprine prescribed forAda’s sciatica could knock her out for thirteen hours, thena whole bottle of them would easily take her home. Thingsstarted to tumble with an alarming speed. Ada checkedherself into a psychiatric ward and I made her check outthe next day. Chima flew into New York.It was strange to see the bulk of him in Ada’s smallyellow kitchen. Ever since I was born, I hadn’t paid muchattention to Ada’s flesh siblings; my brothersisters werefar more interesting. But Chima and A uli mattered verymuch to Ada and she was always involved in somethingwith them, one small hot conflict or the other. She wantedChima to save her, like a big brother, to protect her betterthan I was doing. She thought he was there because she’dbeen in the hospital, and in a way, he was.“I have something to tell you,” he said. “Mummy and Ithought it was better if you heard it in person, since youjust got out of the hospital.”Ada sat at her unstained Ikea kitchen table and lookedacross at her brother. I watched lazily, relaxed now thatwe weren’t locked up in a fucking psych ward anymore. Hewas calm; Chima was always calm.“Uche is dead,” he said, and Ada’s heart staggered.*Uche was Ada’s cousin, the only son of De Simon, one ofSaul’s older brothers. When Ada was a child, before therest of us woke up, she loved going to Umuahia, back towhere she was born. One of her clearest memories therewas of being summoned by the old men who sat under thetree by the road that turned into the family compound.They had examined her face closely, moving it to catch thelight, veined hands directing her jaw.“It’s true,” one of them said. “This one resembles nwaSimon.”The rest nodded in agreement and Ada felt warmthspread in her chest. Looking like Uche meant she belongedsomewhere. It was like they were saying—we can see ourblood in your face, you’re one of ours. All the stories Adaknew about Uche had come from Chima in their childhood,what he overheard from Saul or Saachi, or pretended toknow as the oldest child. That Uche lived in London. ThatUche dated men. That Uche and De Simon had not spokenin over ten years. That Saachi didn’t like how Uche and DeSimon didn’t speak.When Ewan’s family threw that engagement party inDublin, Uche had flown in from London with his partner, aquiet Danish man called John, who worked withastronauts. I was dormant then, just watching Ada behappy. Once Saachi and A uli arrived from the States,A uli and John clicked right away. The two of them spentthe engagement party blowing bubbles together in acorner. Uche was older now; his face was sharp withcheekbones and he had eagle eyes set under his eyebrows.Ada didn’t look like her cousin anymore—the old men musthave been thinking about when he was a child—but sheand Uche danced together on the wooden spread of thedance floor, and later that year, he flew to the States andvisited with Saachi and A uli in the desert of theSouthwest. After Ewan left, after everyone found out thatAda was dating women and flew into fits, Uche was theonly one in the family who really understood, who lovedher and said he was proud. He was meant to visit again,that November, he said, to New York, to see Ada, but hehad a pulmonary embolism and fell down in London inOctober and died.I was furious. It was as if staying alive just gaveeveryone else time to leave you. Chima stayed in New Yorkfor a few days and came to therapy with Ada.“Do you know you haven’t cried?” he said there. “Youjust keep smiling.”Ada smiled politely at him and the therapist. I kept myfingers hooked to the corners of her mouth until Chimaleft.Later that year, Ada was at her girlfriend Donyen’sapartment in Flatbush, speaking on the phone with Saachi.The Christmas presents Saachi had sent were spilling outof Ada’s satchel, peanut M&M’S on the hardwood floor anda stocking full of fluffy mice and feathered sticks, toys thatSaachi had sent for Ada’s cats.“I’m not wrapping up presents for pets,” Ada was tellingher mother, holding the phone to her ear with the lift ofher shoulder. “It’s ridiculous.”“Just hang up the stocking, lah,” Saachi replied. Hervoice crackled over the line. “Open it on Christmas Day.”Ada laughed and I smiled inside her. The wholeconversation was silly, but sometimes even I felt reassuredby how familiar Saachi’s voice was, by how Ada could pickout her handwriting at a glance, how Ada’s ownhandwriting was often mistaken for Saachi’s, as if theirconnection showed in the ink.“Were you the one who used the phone card?” Saachiasked, switching topics. All the children had the PIN forthe card, for when they needed to make international calls,to Saachi’s mother in Kuala Lumpur, to Saul back inNigeria, wherever.“It’s not me,” Ada said. “I think I used it last to call theUK.” She crumpled some paper from the parcel. I yawnedand stretched in her mind. “Wait,” she continued,“actually, have you called Uche? You were supposed to.Did you call Uche?”There was a pause on Saachi’s end. “You mean John,”she said.I could feel Ada’s shock in her throat. The last timeshe’d heard Uche’s voice was when he was in the desertmaking fun of A uli’s fashion choices. She couldn’t believeshe’d forgotten that he was dead, instead of being outthere somewhere with their shared blood under his face.“Yes,” she managed to choke out. “I meant John.”*Ada dated Donyen until the end of the following summer.She still lived in the flat she’d shared with Ewan when theywere married, exposed brick in the bedroom, high ceilings,a fuchsia accent wall. She had interesting new friends:people who could see past flesh; people who prayed togods, were ridden by them; people who heardtransmissions even if they didn’t particularly want to listenin. Her friends began to tell her things.“We’re afraid for you,” they said.“It’s like you’re on this thin line between being alive andbeing dead, like one small shift could send you in eitherdirection.”“The first time I met you, I told another friend that youwere lovely, but that I had this feeling you would diesoon.”I was impressed. It was nice to be seen. None of themcould save Ada, sha. She was done for; she was mine. Iwould’ve killed her sooner, except that her grief overEwan was a little addictive. She ran from it, andeverywhere she ran was somewhere I loved, so I let herlive. Donyen had loved her, but it was nothing like Ewan’slove, and Ada had realized that the grief would find herwhenever she was alone. So she drank a lot of tequila,pouring the golden burn of it down her throat till it heldher from the inside out, tighter than anyone’s arms evercould. She paid attention to the acid in a lime and the feelof rough green skin against her lips, the glow in her thighswhen the alcohol took hold, the taste of blood orange andice. In the bathrooms, she reeled and caught her palm onthe walls as she squatted to pee, her vision unsteady, hersmile shaken out as if her teeth were rattling seeds. Iwatched her laugh in the mirror as she washed her hands.“You’re sooooo drunk,” she slurred, leaning into themirror. I looked back out at her and laughed, delighted.We pushed the bathroom door open and disappeared intothumping beats on the dance floor. Another night, Ada satat a bar where her friend worked, and this friend keptrefilling our glass with the dregs of the drinks that hadbeen mixed for other customers. Ada ended up riding theuptown train alone at two in the morning, and she was sogone that I had to force her to keep her eyes open—I knewwe’d black out the moment she let them close. Still, beingwasted felt wonderful, like I was drifting away from reality,floating in a separate and better space.Back at her apartment, Ada broke open disposablerazors to get to their flimsy blades. She cut her arm next tothe old scars and watched the thin red lines form, theleaking full drops that suspended from her skin until sheflicked them up with her tongue. She threw glasses againstthe wall and they shattered into thousands of fragmentsshining with angry points, a better future than beingwhole. It was all so much better than the grief.When she sat in the marble with me, we looked moreidentical than we ever had, so close that Saint Vincentexcluded himself from our conversation. Ada and I weredrunk on homemade margaritas, using empty milk bottlesas glasses.“I’ve never understood,” she said, “back when I waslittle, why Yshwa wouldn’t come down to hold me, youknow?”“Oh, I know this one,” I said, closing my eyes to feel thesoftness in my blood. “Because he’s a useless asshole.”She ignored me. “Especially when he knew that I didn’thave anyone else.” Ada didn’t sound sad, just matter-offact.I relaxed all my limbs. “I know.”“But I’m older now,” she continued.“Correct.”“Okay, but listen, Asụghara.” She leaned forward and Iopened my eyes to look at her. “Now that I’m older, right,why won’t he just kill me in my sleep?”She pushed some hair out of her face and sat back. Iwanted to tell her Yshwa was always going to disappointher, but I took a sip of my drink instead. She could figurethat out herself.“It’s basically the same thing,” she said. “I didn’t haveanyone to hold me and now I don’t have anyone to kill me.You’d think he’d come through on at least one of thesepoints.”“That’s not true,” I said, and I leaned out to put my handon her arm. “I’ll kill you any day you want.”We stared at each other for a moment, then burst outlaughing because we both knew I meant it. After ourlaughter died away, Ada and I leaned our backs againstthe marble and sighed together.“Do you think about Soren a lot?” she asked.I frowned. “Not really.” I shifted my head to look at her.“You nko?”Ada nodded. “I was thinking how this year makes it fiveyears since you arrived,” she said. “And then I wasthinking of Ewan and I was remembering that night, in thefall, remember? When Ewan had come back and Soren waswatching us.”“Ohhhh fuck, yeah. I remember. The house down thehill, that time when we were in Denis’s room smoking.”“Yup. He used to ring that little bell when the jointswere ready, remember? And then he’d play, like, LaurynHill or Hot Chip.”I laughed. “And Axel was there beating everyone atrock-paper-scissors. Everyone! It didn’t make any fuckingsense, he was so good at it.”Ada smiled, but she was thinking of Soren. “And then hecame in and started talking to me, saying how I never usedto smoke or drink, that he didn’t want to think that I’dstarted now because of what he did. Can you imagine?”“No, no, but you know what I loved?” I was giggling as Iremembered. “Ewan tapped your shoulder and handed youthe blunt, and you just looked at Soren like he wasnothing, took it, and turned away from him. Finish.”“His face! He just walked out of the room.” Ada wasgiggling now too. “Was that you or me?” she asked.I shrugged and drank from my bottle. “Samedifference.”“Oh my god, and remember the e-mail he sent a fewmonths later?”I made my voice high and whiny to mimic him. “‘I neverloved you. I was just missing my girlfriend.’”Ada scoffed. “As if it mattered at that point.”“Eh, he was just trying to get to you.”Ada tilted her bottle up and pouted at me. “It’s empty.”I reached over to touch the glass, and it filled back upwith pink slush.“What’s that?”“Strawberry this time,” I said, and Ada laughed.“This is why I keep you around.”I elbowed her and we drank in silence for a bit. “Howcome you’re thinking about Soren?” I asked.Ada sighed. “I’m pissed, I guess. It feels like he tooksomething from me. I couldn’t even be normal with Ewan.Like, what kind of wife can’t make love to her ownhusband?”I flinched. “Can we just say ‘fuck’? You know how I feelabout calling it that.”“You know what I mean. Have emotional sex.”“We did have emotional sex,” I countered. “There werea lot of emotions involved in our fucking, thank you verymuch.”“Not that kind of emotion. I meant like tenderness.”I flinched again. “Seriously, Ada, or I’ll take your drinkaway.”She laughed. “Okay, okay. You’re fucking weird.” Apause, and then she changed the subject. “Sometimeswhen I think about you, I can see you standing right nextto me and it’s like we’re twins.”I gave her a look. “You know we’re identical, right?”She shushed me with her hand. “Except, when you’restanding next to me, you’re all covered in blood.”I drank some more. “That seems accurate.”“You’d be like the older twin, though, because you takecare of me.”“I’m not very good at that.”Ada shrugged. “Eh. In your own way.”I changed my drink to straight tequila. “No, I’m good athurting people and leaving people, and I’m really good athiding you so that nobody can get you again.”“And you’re good at fucking,” Ada added, holding herbottle out to me.I clinked mine to hers in salute. “And I’m good atfucking.”“And making them feel special.”“Oh, I’m reaaallly good at that.” I smiled at her, but itwas bitter and she knew it.“You did your best, Asụghara.”“Yeah.” I looked into my bottle. “I shouldn’t even haveexisted.”“Oh god, are you getting to the sad drunk stage?” Adareached for my bottle and I hugged it to my chest.“Fuck off!”She laughed. “Okay, stop whining then. You had to exist.I wasn’t ready.”“But, like, you should’ve been, you know? You should’vehad time to do it when you were ready, not the way ithappened.” I was getting a little sad. Maybe her grief wascontagious. I was remembering the day she realized itwasn’t her fault, three years after I arrived, when she readthe definition of rape online and burst into tears in Ewan’sgarden in Dublin, crying and crying as he held her.“You should’ve had a chance to be ready,” I said.Ada sipped her drink, tilting her head back. “Shithappens,” she said.“Okay, now you sound like me.”“Hah. I’m just trying to be at peace. If I don’t, I’ll end upblaming Soren for me losing Ewan and that kind of makesme want to find the bastard and stab him in the face.”I tapped my bottle against hers. “Shit, I’m down withthat.”Ada smiled and put her head on my shoulder. “Don’tleave me,” she said. “I don’t think anyone else will wantme without you.”“Don’t say that.”“It’s true. I’m the damaged and broken one; you’re thebright and shiny one. Who are they going to love more?They don’t have to do any work with you.”“I’m not going to leave you, but then you have to comewith me, okay?”“Come where?”I exhaled. “You know where.”Ada hesitated. “It’s just that I’m scared, Asụghara. Iwant to, but what if it doesn’t work?”I put down my bottle and put my arm around her. “Iknow,” I said, and we sat together for a long time, sayingnothing.*Ada surrendered to me in October, a year after Uche died.She was seeing a man named Hassan then, a capoeirateacher who she’d met at a club in Harlem during herbreakup with Donyen. It was on a night when I was outhunting in her body, and Hassan had been standing by theclub exit, dressed in tight black, his hair pouring down hisback. I let him take Ada to his apartment, where he dancedin his living room, his locs flying in the air. He kept talkingthe whole time, hard and fast, and his words jumped andscattered and cartwheeled. I was tired of them, so Iclimbed into the stretch of his black satin bed and watchedhim pull off his shirt. He was still talking.“Shut up and fuck me,” I said.I remember how he stopped, shocked, before hegathered himself and climbed onto the bed with me. Forthe rest of the night I got to be myself in my meaty form,doing meaty things. I didn’t have to think about Ada losingEwan and neither did she, so it was good. It was a whiteblank space of pleasure and I felt free inside it.The morning that Ada’s surrender happened, she wassad because she’d had a fight with Hassan the nightbefore. I was tired of everything, tired of the number oftimes I was going to have to watch her be in pain. So I sather down in her yellow kitchen and splayed her out on achair. She propped up her elbows on the raw wood of thekitchen table, stained with old splatters of turmeric andtomato. Uche’s corpse sat across from her, his lung clotturning him gray as he watched her with gutted eyelidsand still blood. Ada stirred miso paste and dehydratedseaweed into a bowl of hot water, talking softly to him as ifhe was alive. I stood behind her with my palm on hershoulder.“Where did they put you?” she asked. “Tell me and I’llcome find you.”I purred in her wrists. I was keeping a fine balance bybringing Uche’s shade here, maintaining a delicate tensionbetween Ada’s world and that of the brothersisters.“I’m sorry I didn’t come sooner,” Ada said. “Theystopped me. And I know you’ll want me to stay with them,but Uche, honestly, I don’t want to anymore.” She stoppedstirring for a moment. “I wish I could tell them that.”I watched as Ada reached for her prescription bottle,pressed down and turned, popping the lid open. They werepainkillers—Donyen had taken away all the musclerelaxants after she heard about the suicide plan. I triedrefilling the prescription, but Ada gave it to Hassanbecause he had a thing for pills and injections, so all wehad left were the painkillers. I figured we could managewith them.“I wish I could’ve said good-bye to everyone withoutthem freaking out, you know? No crying, no trying to lockme up. As if I was just traveling. Plus, there’s no need forthem to worry—I’ve got family waiting.”Uche’s corpse leaned back and extended a long legtoward her refrigerator, folding its arms. A large flake ofskin hung precariously off the steep height of its cheek.“Alexander Uncle, Bishop Uncle, Grandpa, you.” Adalooked up at Uche’s corpse as she listed Saachi’s deadfamily and frowned. “I feel you’ll either be the mostwelcoming or the most angry.” Her face crumpled intosadness at even the thought of it. “Don’t be angry at me,please,” she said. “I’ve had too much of it down here. Iknow I’m too much and everyone is tired of it, especiallyme. And I know the others care, but they’ll stop me and Ijust want to lose, just this once.”She spilled the pills on the table, above the bowl andnext to the open packet of freeze-dried strawberries.Uche’s corpse dropped its heavy-lidded eyes to the poolshe’d just made. I followed its gaze, looking down at thethousands of milligrams that were on our side. We couldn’tlose, not this time.I leaned into Ada’s ear. “You know how they say takethings a day at a time?” I said. “You can manage a pill at atime.”Ada nodded and I kept the count for her. A few hundredmilligrams down, several thousand, a few hundred more togo. She always hated taking tablets with water and she’dmeant to make grapefruit juice earlier, but the juicer wasdirty. The dishwashing liquid was grapefruit scented. Shetipped the bowl of miso soup to her mouth. When she wasa child, Ada used to take medicine with chocolate milk, orelse it would all come pouring thickly back up. I kept countfor her.A few thousand and a few hundred down. The trick, Ihad realized, was to get Ada to pretend that none of thiswas happening. Because if it was happening, she’d have tocall her best friend, and what could that one do exceptworry from far away? So I made the kitchen unreal andUche was there to prove it. If you die in a video game, doyou die in real life? She had practice in the unreal from allthose years of fairies, all those years of believing infloating lands and split selves; they were preparing all forthis moment, this true attempt, this ultimate belief. I keptthe count for her.More thousands, more hundreds of milligrams. We werehalfway done. Ada thought of Bassey Ikpi and her fifteenyear-old friend who killed herself. There was a wholenonprofit now named after her, the Siwe Project. Shethought of all the gay kids who had killed themselves backto back that year, including the young man she spoke to onthe train in Brooklyn, who’d gone home and hangedhimself. The unseen and hurting ones, all leaving together.It felt like she had missed a train and was trying to catchup, slipping on the tracks.I kept the count going. We had spent entirely too longwith a foot in this world; the hold had to give, the foot hadto return. The Obi may kneel down, but it never crumbles.Hassan spoiled everything by calling her.*I watched it fall apart from there. I watched Ada talk toHassan as if nothing had happened, as if Uche hadn’t beenand then not been in her kitchen, as if the unreal I’d spentall morning building hadn’t just been destroyed. Rightbefore she got off the phone, she told him.“I think I did something stupid,” she said, only calling itthat because she knew that’s what he would call it.“What did you do?”“… I took some pills.”“What?”“I took some pills.”“Some? How many did you take?”Ada said nothing.“How many did you take, Ada?!”She tried to make it sound like a joke. “Um, quite a lot.”“What the fuck?!”“No, no, it’s fine. Let me call you back. I’m going to callone of my friends and sort it out.” Ada hung up on him andturned on her computer. I watched, frozen. Just like that.Everything, gone. She was video chatting now, explainingwhat happened to one of her friends, being bright andchirpy in a way that was probably obscene.Her friend was panicking. “Should I call 911?” she keptasking.“No!” At least Ada and I were still on the same pagewith that. “Don’t call anyone. It’s going to be fine. I’m justgoing to make myself throw up—I didn’t take that many.It’ll be fine. Hold on.”I followed Ada numbly to the bathroom and watched herstick her fingers down her throat. Nothing came up but apiece of seaweed and some bile. She kept trying for aboutten minutes, then went back to the computer and kepttalking to her friend.“I was just having a bad morning, like I was tired ofeverything—” Ada was interrupted by a banging on thefront door and her friend started crying.“I’m sorry,” she said to Ada. “I had to call them.”Ada burst into short and panicked sobs. “No, no, no!”She slammed the laptop shut and I stepped in quickly,smoothing out her face so we could answer the door.“Don’t let them see you like this,” I told her. I couldbarely feel anything—my failure was overwhelming—butwe were still alive, and I still knew my job. Three policeofficers came in and started asking questions as I watched.“Why would you go and do something like that?” one ofthem asked, amused. “Things can’t be that bad.”I put a smile on Ada’s face and she kept it as she lookedat him, as she walked down the stairs and out to thesidewalk, where the ambulance was waiting for her.Donyen jumped out of a taxi and came up to Ada.“Your friend called me,” she said. “Told me you didn’twant her to call 911 and I told her to call them. I told her,‘Do you want Ada to be mad at you or do you want her tobe dead?’ I’m coming with you.”I kept a smile stuck on Ada’s face as they both climbedinto the back of the ambulance. I had failed. Already, Iknew that a second chance would be much harder to comeby. But for now I had to handle the crisis I’d thrown usinto. I did it with that same smile, joking with the nursestill they got irritated. One of them was Nigerian, and shescolded Ada without sympathy, forcing her to drink liquidcharcoal. I watched Ada vomit it up into a white toiletbowl. I watched as she became delirious, as she panicked,as her other friends came and sat on her hospital bed.They sent a psychiatrist to come and evaluate her, but hedidn’t like our attitude and I could tell that he wanted tolock us up. That sobered me up faster than anything elsewould have. There was no way I was ever letting someonecommit us, not after that night in the ward the year before.“Let me handle it,” I told Ada, even though we wereboth exhausted.Donyen had gotten Hassan’s number from someone elseand called him behind Ada’s back, yelling at him for notbeing there. I was furious when Hassan told us.“You had no right to call him,” I told Donyen, Ada’shospital gown crinkling at our shoulders. “It’s none of yourbusiness.”“Are you serious?” she said. “You were calling his name,did you know? When you were delirious. You were callinghis name and he can’t even fucking come and see you?”I took a deep breath. It was so fucking inconvenient tobe dealing with this right when the doctors were trying todecide whether to discharge Ada or dump her in a psychward. I wanted to slap Donyen. “You’re my ex!” I snapped.“You can’t be calling the person I’m seeing now to shout athim. And now I have to handle this shit in the middle ofeverything else because you can’t mind your fuckingbusiness.”Hassan had been upset on the phone when he finally gotthrough to Ada. “I can’t do this shit,” he said. “Your ex isfucking crazy.”“Dude,” I told him, “you don’t have to come to thehospital.” The last time he’d been in one was when hismother had died. He’d been avoiding them since.He showed up anyway, to tell Ada that he wanted tobreak up. I almost laughed. She was in a hospital bed aftermy suicide attempt and now she was getting dumped.Wonderful.“Can you meet the doctor with me?” I asked him. “Youwere the last person I was with before it happened. I needsomeone to vouch for me.”So Hassan sat next to Ada across from the doctor, andhe and I both turned on the charm, smiling anddownplaying everything.“I’ve had eight friends come in over the past twelvehours,” I told the doctor. “Do you really think it’s in mybest interests to be separated from my support system andadmitted into a ward without any form of outsidecommunication instead of being released into theircustody?”She tapped on her desk. “The doctor who evaluated youfelt you might be a risk to yourself,” she said.I smiled, and it was broad and confident. “I was a littlegroggy when he was asking me questions and he seemed abit irritated, I don’t know why. But you can see for yourselfthat I’m in good hands.”Hassan stepped in with his bright teeth and assured herthat yes, Ada was in good hands, she’d been fine when hesaw her the night before, and it was all just a roughmorning. “She’ll be okay, we’ll take care of her,” he lied.Donyen had already walked out in a temper before hearrived. “I know I abandoned you,” she said later. “I wasangry. I’m sorry.”The doctor discharged Ada, to my collapsing relief.Saachi had been calling but I wouldn’t take her calls orChima’s. She called one of Ada’s friends instead. “Sheneeds to stay in the hospital,” Saachi said. “Let me talk toher doctors.”She couldn’t. I’d had Ada revoke all Saachi’s accessback when she started calling us unstable, so she wasn’tAda’s emergency contact anymore, and since this wasAmerica, the doctors refused to talk to her. “We don’t havethe patient’s permission,” they said. Later in the evening,Ada spoke to A uli.“Are you okay now?” A uli asked.“Yeah, I’m good,” Ada lied.“Okay. Good.”That was it. Just like that, I had lost.Chapter SeventeenHow many days are we going to useto count the teeth of the devil?WeTell a child to wash her body and she washes her stomach.Asụghara was a fool for what she tried. Of all the paths shecould have chosen, she went and picked the one that wastaboo to Ala, as if she would be allowed to complete it, as ifshe forgot whose child the Ada was. Life does not belongto us to take. And on top of that, she should haveremembered that we are ọgbanje; none of us die like this.It had been a good gamble nonetheless, having the littlebeastself out in the world, allowing her to leap from bed tobed and shake hearts between her pointed teeth. Whenshe failed at returning through the gates, we felt the stingof it strongly. If Ala did not want us to return yet, then wehad been disobedient by trying. The brothersisters were noexcuse, even though they had commanded us to come back—between them and her, the choice of who to obeyshouldn’t have been a choice.So we were still caged inside the Ada, with the grainymemory of charcoal coating the back of her throat. Shewas more isolated than ever and we were chafing at stillbeing flesh, so the only thing left to do was hunt. If wewere trapped in a body, then we would do bodily things.We painted the Ada’s mouth and lined her eyes with night,and we went out with Asụghara on a long and relaxedleash. It was easy, as it always was. At the bar, there was aman with eyes like anchors and hair like snakes, andalthough he was shy there, he held the Ada’s hand whenshe got out of the taxi and walked with him to thebrownstone he lived in. What a gentle strange thing, wethought. We felt large and cruel next to him, Asụgharahiding behind the sweet of the Ada’s face, puzzled by hisdelicacy. In his apartment, we watched as he movedaround his shelves and furniture. He was a craftsman andthere were fine things everywhere. The Ada saidsomething that amused him and he took her face in hishands, laughing, and kissed her in a pure and glimmeringmoment.In the tightness of his bedroom, Asụghara put our palmagainst the red houndstooth wall and cried out as hemoved in the Ada. The flesh was flesh, and for a littlewhile, we could forget all the hurt, all the weight of overtwo decades of embodiment destroying us. He was sobeautiful.“You don’t have to be gentle,” Asụghara told him. Helooked in our eyes, raised his hand, and hit us hard acrossthe Ada’s face. The impact rattled her jaw, but we didn’tlook away; we felt the taste of rain fill our mouth. Ah, hewas such a gentle, strange thing, to hurt us so perfectly. Inthe morning, before his reality descended on him again, heturned his head to the Ada.“I needed this,” he whispered. “I needed you.”She had forgotten his name, if she ever knew it, and wenever heard from him again. Months later, when thesummer was starting and Brooklyn was spilling sunshine,the Ada ran into him at a street festival and he lowered hisanchor eyes as he passed. We forgave him easily. After youhave let the wilderness in you come out and play, after youhave spilled your darkness in front of a stranger, it can bedifficult to look at them in the sentience of daylight.Besides, he was only a beautiful blip in the crazed timelineof embodiment—he mattered so much, and yet, not at all.In the months since we’d been in his bed, the Ada hadbeen to Lagos, to Cape Town and Johannesburg, whereAsụghara had taken bodies in backseats and hostel bedsand living room floors. We had overreacted and scared thehumans, forgotten their names and faces, betrayed somefriends and left others. Even all of that was nothingcompared to the best thing we’d accomplished, when welaid out the Ada’s body on a surgical table and let amasked man take a knife lavishly to the flesh of her chest,mutilating her better and deeper than we ever could, allthe way to righteousness. After such carvings, how couldone human matter?*The Ada’s surgery happened the spring after Asụghara’sfailed attempt, just five months later. Before then, we usedto think of the body as belonging truly to the Ada, assomething that we were only guests in, something that thebeastself could borrow. But now that we had been spurnedfrom the gates, now that we were sentenced to meat, itwas time to accept that this body was ours too. And withSaint Vincent, our little grace, taking the front more thanhe used to, the body, as it was, was becomingunsatisfactory, too feminine, too reproductive. That formhad worked for Asụghara—those breasts with the large,dark areolae and nipples she could lift to her mouth—butwe were more than her and we were more than the saint.We were a fine balance, bigger than whatever the namingshad made, and we wanted to reflect that, to change theAda into us. Removing her breasts was only the first step.You must understand, fertility was a pure and clearabomination to us. It would be unthinkable, unbelievablycruel for us to ever swell so unnaturally, to lactate, tomutate our vessel. Could there be anything more human?The ways of our brothersisters, of ọgbanje, were clear. Donot leave a human lineage, for you did not come from ahuman lineage. If you have no ancestors, you cannotbecome an ancestor. We were happy to obey theseinstructions; we had always ferociously protected the Adafrom the blasphemy of having another life grow in her.How many times had Asụghara allowed a wash of sperminto the Ada’s body? Yet each time, we hardened against itand nothing took. We were a miracle like that, a mercy tothe Ada.When Ewan left and Asụghara allowed Saint Vincent totake the Ada’s body and start binding her chest—all ofthese things were in preparation for a shedding, the skinsplitting in long seams. The first time the Ada wore thebinder, she turned sideways in a mirror and Saint Vincentlaughed out loud in relief, in joy, in the rightness of theabsence. The Ada was wearing faded purple jeans, and thesoft of her belly swelled out from under the cutting bottomedge of the vest. But she could endure that, even thesharpness around her armpits. The flatness was worth it.The Ada pulled a short-sleeved T-shirt over the vest andran her hands up and down the mild curve. It felt likearmor, like we were bulletproof, like Saint Vincent wasbeing built up in layers of determined fiber. The Ada worethe binder every day and washed it by hand in her smallbathroom sink. Once, she made the mistake of putting it inthe dryer, weakening the elastic. Saint Vincent sufferedwith each fraction of looseness she had caused, so she wasmore careful after that.Before Asụghara put us in the emergency room, we hadbeen searching for doctors to alter the Ada, to carve ourbody into something that we could truly call a home.Saachi finally realized, in her panic over the Ada’s suicideattempt, exactly how much of her daughter actuallybelonged to her, which was to say, not much at all. TheAda was slipping from the human mother to us, to afreedom Saachi didn’t trust. After all, how could she keepthe girl safe if the girl wouldn’t listen, wouldn’t obey, if thegirl was us? We were grateful that Saachi had at one timecared for the Ada, had kept her alive as a baby and beenan excellent guardian as far as she could, but what did sheknow of graces or beastselves or ugly, unwelcomeembodiments or the sacrifices a snake must go through tocontinue its timeline, the necessity of molting, the gravesbuilt of skins? We ignored her as gently as we could—thisbody was ours, not hers; this girl was ours, not hers, shehad to understand where her jurisdiction ended and howpushing further was blasphemy.The Ada used a therapist to assist with our carving planand we discovered that humans had medical words—termsfor what we were trying to do—that there wereprocedures, gender reassignment, transitioning. We knewwhat we were planning was right. Even the things that theAda used to dislike about her body had mellowed out oncewe let Saint Vincent run. Then, the broad shoulders andthe way they tapered down to narrow hips and smallbuttocks finally fit. Men’s clothes draped properly on thisbody—we were handsome. We considered removing thebreasts utterly and tattooing the flat of her chestbone, butthat decisiveness still felt wrong, one end of the spectrumrocketing unsteadily to the other end—it wasn’t us, notyet. So we chose a reduction instead of a removal; we cutdown the C cups of blatant mammary tissue to small As,flat enough to not need brassieres, to not move, to be astillness. The Ada wanted to include her human mother inthe carving and we allowed it because, we supposed,vessels are loyal. But Saachi was against the surgery—shecalled the doctors and threatened them till they pulled out;she fought with the therapists, fought to have us seen asunstable, sick. She called Saul, who she never spoke to,not since the divorce, and told him, outed us to him.“Your daughter is trying to cut off her breasts,” shesaid.The Ada was furious but we remained calm. Weunderstood what was necessary—humans often fail atlistening, as if their stubbornness will convince the truth tochange, as if they have that kind of power. They do,however, understand forceful things, cruelties—they obeythose. So we terminated Saachi’s contact with the Ada’sdoctors, we excluded her, exiled and excommunicated her.This was when she stopped being an emergency contact;this was why she had no access to the Ada’s doctors whenAsụghara tried to kill the body. For a woman who looked todrown her loneliness in her children, it was a brutal thingto do, to push her out. But we had to strip her of power, toremind her that a mere human could not thwart us, thatshe stood no chance. We do not return your children untilit suits us, if ever.When we found the next doctors, the human motherknew nothing about it. The Ada brought in pictures ofsmall chests, small enough to where we didn’t think ofthem as breasts, small enough to where we could feelreverted to a time when we weren’t capable of biologicalthings, when we were neutral like we should have been.The Ada hoarded her student loan refunds until she hadenough: thousands to pay the doctor and theanesthesiologist. She braided long yarn onto her locs sothey could be tied back and left alone as we recoveredfrom the surgery.Saachi called the Ada, unaware of the plan, excited for avisit she was planning to see her sister. “I’m coming toNew York,” she said. “I need to get a visa for China.”The Ada began to panic but we brushed her aside. Itwas an unnecessary reaction—what a waste of time tospend it being human. We wrote to Saachi and informedher that the Ada was getting an operation the day beforeSaachi’s flight would arrive.“You are welcome to stay at the apartment if you’regoing to be supportive,” we wrote. “Otherwise, you have tostay at a hotel.” It was simpler this way. We were aninevitable force; it would be easier to fall into our flowthan to question things. Like we said, she needed tounderstand. The girl belonged to us, had always belongedto us.On the day of the surgery, the doctor drew thick blacklines over the Ada’s chest. He explained how he was goingto make incisions in the underneath fold of the breast, sliceup the middle, ring the nipple in a smooth, round, andbloody cut. The fatty tissue would be removed; the darkcircle of areolae would be made small, tiny, a bare orbitaround the nipple. The gashes would be stitched with amaterial that the flesh would take in later so it wouldn’thave to be taken out. Pictures were taken. They slid a thinand strong length of hollow metal into the Ada’s arm andfed her drugs through it. She had never been sedatedbefore; we had known nothing of the taste of such drugssince the days we were born, and it was a strangeartificiality as we counted down, as we went absolutelynowhere. There were no gates, no middle spaces—we werejust gone and then we were back and it was hours laterand we were missing weight from our chest.Saachi arrived the next day and said nothing about thesurgery, asked no questions. We approved of her decision.She accompanied the Ada to the post-op appointment, tothe clean, organized waiting room, then back to theexposed brick of the Ada’s apartment and her yellowkitchen. She helped the Ada change the dressings andcaught her arm when the heat from the shower made ourbody faint. It was a relief; we were grateful for thereprieve, not for us, no, but for the Ada. Malena was thereas well, witness as she always was, and the Ada smiled tosee her mother share Heinekens and Dominican cigarswith this her saintridden friend. As for us, we werefascinated by the white tape that hid the cuts, by the finestitching, by the new body. We juggled the Ada’s chemistryand decided to purify her: we ran through her cells andrejected alcohol, meat, dairy, processed sugars; we madethem cramp her stomach, hurt her head, and twist herintestines. This was our body and it would become whatwe wanted, now that the reconfiguring was done.Before the surgery, the Ada had told her friends that shecouldn’t wait for when she could wear dresses again. Theywere confused. They stared at her bound chest and boyclothes.“Why would you go more feminine without boobs?” theyasked. “Most people get it done to be more masculine.”The Ada shrugged and we moved in her shoulders. Itwas simple how we saw ourself, dresses creeping up thethigh, gashing open at the front to show chest bone—tulleand lace and clouds of clothes. Just like how having longhair weighing down our back made us want to wearbuttons up to our throat, men’s sleeves rolled up ourbiceps, handsome, handsome things. None of this was anew thing. We had been the same since the first birth,through the second naming, the third molting. To make thevessel look a little more like us—that was the extent of ourintent. We have understood what we are, the places we aresuspended in, between the inaccurate concepts of maleand female, between the us and the brothersistersslavering on the other side.After our first birth, it took only a short time before werealized that time had trapped us in a space where we nolonger were what we used to be, but had not yet becomewhat we were going to be. It was a place that always andnever moved. The space between the spirits and the aliveis death. The space between life and death is resurrection.It has a smell like a broken mango leaf, sharp, sticking tothe inner rind of our skin.The prophecies that came later, from Malena andothers, they explained this—the shifting, the quickskinnings and reshapings, the falling and revival of thescales. But by then it was too late for the Ada to doanything except try to keep up with us, try not to bedrowned in the liminal fluid we swam in. It tasted sharp asgin, metallic as blood, was soaked in both, down past thered into the deep loam. Ọgbanje space. We could rest in itlike the inside curve of a calabash; we could turn in onourself, wind back to our beginning, make those final folds.Sometimes they call this the crossroads, the messagepoint, the hinge. It is also called flux space, the line or theedge—like we said, resurrection.Chapter EighteenMy god, my god.WeThere had been, in all of this, some comfort in knowingthat we were not the first to pass through and wake up inflesh. Since the baptism, since they called him up from theacid of the sea with prayer, we’d known about Yshwa. Heremained throughout the years, drifting by and over, hisface shifting, the bones underneath bubbling and moving.We understood Asụghara’s resentment of him, for hisrefusal to take flesh again for the Ada, but his choice madesense. It has always been obvious that Yshwa, like othergods, is not moved by suffering in the ways humansimagine.Perhaps he would take flesh one last time, when theworld was ending, just to watch it burn. Or he mightcontinue to stay away, despite how many people awaitedhis glorious redescent. If we were him, we would do that,stay away. Why exist in this realm by choice? Humanitywas ugly and cratered; it made sleep a relief, a briefescape where we could slide into another realm. That wasas close to death as we could get, as close to the gates, toreturning home or anywhere else. If we had been releasedlike Yshwa, no amount of praying or fasting or midnightvigils would bring us back, no matter how much olive oil orblood was spilled in our name. But that was not whathappened.We remained trapped and so Asụghara softened towardYshwa as he kept visiting the marble for his meetings withthe Ada. At first, Asụghara would turn away and pretendnot to hear the soft ripple of their conversations, the onlyform of prayer the Ada was capable of anymore. Ever sinceSoren, she couldn’t kneel or press her palms together toworship Yshwa the way she used to—it felt false. Too muchhad been broken. So the Ada simply spoke to him as theytook walks along grassed paths and black beaches, wherethey would sit on sea bones and watch the water.Yshwa was different every time he manifested. He usedvariations of his original human form, changing the height,the degree of brown in his skin from mild to deep, thecleanliness of his linens, the kink of his dark hair, thebreadth of his nose. His hands would be long fingered withsmooth, pearled nails, or broad and stocky with callusedpalms that he picked splinters out of as they spoke.Sometimes he was tall, thin, with a graceful neck and tiredeyes, his skin black as stone. Or he’d be thick, barrelchested,thighs like foundations, skin like burnt sugar. Hewas always gentle.When Asụghara started to turn toward him, slowly andhesitantly, Yshwa called no attention to it. He continuedthe conversations as if he’d been speaking to bothAsụghara and the Ada all along, as if he’d always knownthe beastself was listening and his words had been meantfor everyone. We approved of Asụghara’s change of heartbecause, after all, Yshwa understood better than anyonewhat we were going through, having died in his own fleshform, and having him was better than being alone here.Besides, since his embodied days had been so long beforeours, we could accept him as an older sibling. It was niceto have another brothersister.We tried to teach ourself to see humans as he did, withthe same grace, to follow his example. After Soren and theloss of her faith, the Ada had decided that her life wasbetter with Yshwa in it after all. It didn’t matter to her ifhe was real; she believed that the church around him wasirrelevant, and she hoped that her afterlife would be one ofoblivion. The Ada chose him because she needed a moralcode to control us with, one that could protect her andothers from our hungers. Yshwa had a good code, a simpleone: love. Still, we found it difficult, unnatural even, toembrace his ways. The only vessel we truly cared aboutwas ours: the Ada. Apart from her, we did hold Saachi insome regard for being the container of a universe, andA uli for being A uli. The Ada, however, cared about morethan those two—she cared about Saul and Chima, abouther friends; she had a long list of loved ones. We did not,as the beastself had demonstrated with Itohan’s olderbrother in Georgia, and were not inclined to—most of whatwe knew of humans was what the beastself knew, that theywere cruel, that their world was cruel, that everyone was,inevitably, going to turn into dust. We could see the logicof the beastself’s philosophy—to hunt and feed on bodies,to use them in wringing out pleasure, to put that beforeanything, because otherwise, why were we alive and whatwas the point?But it was not the using of humans that alarmed the Adaenough to try and guide us with a code. It was the placeswe went for pleasure with Asụghara guiding us—theecstasy we felt in tricking humans and watching theirheartbreak, watching them crumple against walls, seeingthe shocked pain in their eyes. We had no remorse; we leftthat to the Ada. We became complicit in many betrayals,met men who lied and devastated their women, whodespised humans like we did, who acted like they weregods and not humans. We let Asụghara play with thesemen, and when she was tired of batting them around andbaiting them with the Ada’s heart, we helped her remindthem that divinity was deliberately not accorded to allflesh, that they were nothing, no better than the womenthey thought they could injure. The men all confessed theirlove to the beastself, with their mouths or with hunger intheir eyes after she left them, after she threw them allaway. The Ada suffered in this because, like a human, shehad loved some of them.When we were faced with Yshwa, it was easy to justifythe things we had done. We did not care. The Ada wantedto be contrite. Asụghara wanted to burn the world down.We were guilty only of allowing the beastself to run thebody into mattresses and hearts. What did it matter?“You are weak with lust,” Yshwa told us.“Argue with the beastself,” we said, and we leftAsụghara out for him.She shrugged. “They are only humans.”“You’re no better,” he countered. “Driven by instinct,incapable of restraint, ruled by desire.”Asụghara hissed, offended. “You don’t understand—”she began, but Yshwa raised a hand to silence her.“You forget,” he said. “I once had a body too.”The silence that fell was weighted. “I just want to befree,” Asụghara said eventually.We wondered if she meant from us, if she wanted to bea separate self, with her own body, doing as she pleased. Ifso, she would have to learn, as the Ada had, what things inthis life were impossible. The whole is greater than theindividual.“I thought you wanted to follow my teachings,” Yshwasaid, but he meant all of us, not her.We hesitated. The Ada wanted to follow him, that muchwas clear; she had never tried to steer all of us as firmly asshe was attempting now, but we were many and she wassmall.“Don’t ask me to stop for the humans,” Asụghara spat.“Taking from them is the only pleasure we have left.”“You can’t lean on that forever,” Yshwa said.“Do you have a better plan? Do you know how to makethe pain stop?”It was only with eyes like ours that we saw Yshwa flinch,just with fractions of his skin, as if he was remembering.“It doesn’t.”Asụghara spoke for us. “Then we won’t either.”He came up and laid his hand on her cheek. It burned,and she turned into the Ada. “Do it for me,” he whispered.The Ada’s eyes filled with tears. “It’s not fair, Yshwa. Wejust want it to stop hurting. Or have you forgotten? At leastyou got to die.”She wanted to look away—we wanted to look away—butYshwa held her face tight. His breath felt like a thousandtiny cuts against our skin.“We’re gods,” he reminded her. “I don’t have to be fair.”When he pressed his mouth to her forehead, our bonesboiled underneath. The Ada closed her eyes. “I will leadyou,” he whispered, “down the paths of righteousness fornothing, other than the sake of my name.” When we lookedup again, he was gone.It was not the last time he tried to save us, to pull us outof our own condemnation and wrap us in his peace. Yshwaknew the Ada’s secret fear—that she had become evilbecause of the things Asụghara had done.It didn’t matter. He was not enough.We stopped hunting because it had lost its shine, but wecould not give Yshwa what he wanted. There was too muchsafety in sin, too much sweetness to walk away from. Wetook lovers who belonged to other people, kissed husbandsafter the sun had set and also in the broad brightness ofafternoon. We gave the Ada new men, not entirelyreformed, but not as cruel as the ones before them. Shefelt a little safer with these ones, so she wrote about themto Yshwa, like evidence of small remedies, proof that shewas slowly, somehow, being saved.Chapter NineteenYou cannot find it. And if you find it, you cannot touch it.AdaDear Yshwa,I am lying in bed in my lover’s shirt. He always leavessomething behind, but he doesn’t mean to. The first time itwas that navy cardigan, the one I wore till he came back.The sleeves were too big and they swallowed up myelbows.Yesterday, when he left, I walked him to the train andhe kissed me on the platform. I watched the train pullaway and then I walked back up the stairs, across theconcrete of the plaza. I walked through the battered whitedoor of my building and up the rickety stairs to myapartment. His white T-shirt was lying on my bed. Itsmelled like him. I stripped off my clothes and pulled itover my body. I slept in his scent.I love him, but not too much. Carefully. He doesn’ttouch me when he sleeps but he holds me against himwhen he’s awake. It is simple with him. There’s fun, goodfriendship, and powerful orgasms. Sometimes, it feels likeI don’t need anything else.“I don’t believe in missing people,” he tells me. “If I missyou, I can just call you.”He’s rarely in the country when he calls. I love him, butjust enough.“Look at this,” he says, watching us in the mirror, ourskins wet and gleaming. “This is so fucking beautiful.”*Don’t get me wrong. I still want forever, Yshwa. But I’velearned that you can’t force forever on the wrong people.They belong exactly where they are, giving exactly whatthey want to. I don’t ask for anything more. I figure Ishouldn’t have to. Besides, I think about you all the timeand it helps me detach from all of this. It releases me.When you look at life from far away enough, the things wetalk, think, and gossip about fade to tiny dots, to nothing. Ithink, will this all matter in thirty years?I will see my other lover, the painter, in a few weeks.None of us share continents, which makes things simple. Itouch his face like it’s holy. He likes to tell me that I’mfree, that I can’t be held in a cage, and I used to deny it.But one day I realized I don’t tell him about the othersbecause something about that really does keep me free. Ilove him, though, and it feels easy.When I think of them and the love I hold for them, itunfurls into a greater love. My chest multiplies with it. Ieven want to hold the faces of my friends and tell them Ilove them. I don’t feel trapped or anchored, which is reallystrange, Yshwa. I stop being afraid of relocations and I canmove wherever I want because I know that I will be lovedconstantly across all space. And even if it fades with them,it will bloom again. We are all conduits. It moves throughus freely.Yshwa, I am tired of pain. It’s just easier to focus on loveand an existence outside this world. At least that feels likefreedom.*Still, you like to send me new lovers, like impulsivepresents. Like that one who I thought was going to becocky and brash. He arrived after I had a difficult weekand he turned out to be shy and clumsy, like a boy. He wassingle-minded in bed, his face serene and focused, his bodyhammering. Boys fuck like that, fast and hard anddesperate. But when we stood on the open train platform,exposed to the sky, he pulled me to his chest. I turned myhead away so my lipstick wouldn’t stain his clothes and hekissed my forehead more times than anyone had in thepast few years. He talked about tennis all the time, likeEwan used to. When we said good-bye, I was wearing thesame dress he’d met me in.“I’ll miss you,” I texted.“You made my trip,” he typed back.*Still, I am very lonely. They help me forget this, butsometimes it shows up like a continent shifting onto mychest. I’m so tired of being empty. I turned it inside outand wore it like a glove, smeared it on the walls until myhouse shouted empty, empty, empty. I didn’t know what todo with it afterward. All I know is that it hurts to be in thespaces between freedom.“Can I have a hug?” I ask my white T-shirt lover.“Of course,” he answers, and holds me. “Are you okay?”I want to tell him that my heartache is acting up again,but instead I smile and lie and lie next to his body,watching an animated movie flicker across the screen. Itake a little comfort in the fact that he chose to be lyinghere with me. It matters, even though I still feel lonelywith him there.He saw the scars on my arms for the first time today.“We have to talk,” he said.“I used to cut myself,” I replied. “I stopped.”“I’m glad you stopped,” he said, but it reminded me ofhow long all of this has been hurting. The pain is so old,Yshwa. I don’t even have the strength to want anythinganymore. I just float and stare at the sky, and when thepain hits, I arch my neck to keep the water fromovercoming my face. Months ago, the painter looked at meas we lay in his bed.“That sadness never really leaves your eyes,” he said.*When I was out in Lagos with a group of friends, I met thisSomali boy who told me I inhabit a space betweendepression and happiness, a sweet spot, a brilliant spot. Istared at him and wondered if it was true. If it was, couldthat spot be more real than either end of that spectrum? Itwould be a point of perfect balance, I thought.“You are the most beautiful woman I have seen in all mylife,” he said.“Why?” I asked.He stared at me, then laughed. “Beauty is beauty,” hesaid, shaking his head. “It just is.”I stared back at him. He hadn’t been able to stopdrinking all night. He had worked his way through smallglasses of tequila, larger glasses of vodka, occasional cupsof tap water, and he was now holding a blue glass full ofgin. I watched him and then I told him about Ewan. When Imentioned Donyen, his face changed.“You’re too pretty to be gay,” he said.Later that night, he asked if we had met in a previouslife, and I said nothing. We all went to another club, andthere, he took my hand and pulled me out under somepurple lights.“I will miss you,” he said. “I wish we had more time.”I wasn’t sure what he was running away from, but Iwanted to tell him that I was the wrong place to run to. Itwas impossible for me to love him. He had too much hateinside and he thought I would fall for words, as if you canget me with my own weapon. Try a god, I should have toldhim, they like when you run to them.*Honestly, Yshwa, I just want to rest. Let me find a placewhere even if I’m alone, I can sit on my veranda and lookat a mango tree and we can just talk. You will be the wordsin my mouth and the ones that fall from my fingers; youwill be the one to whom I direct my longing.NZỌPỤTA(Salvation)Chapter TwentyHiding, oh, hiding! The hidden should hide very well,because I am letting go the leopard.WeAllow us a moment to explain a few things. When youbreak something, you must study the pattern of theshattering before you can piece it back together. So it waswith the Ada. She was a question wrapped up in breath:How do you survive when they place a god inside yourbody? We said before that it was like shoving a sun into abag of skin, so it should be no surprise that her skin wouldsplit or her mind would break. Consider her burned open.It was an unusual incarnation, to be a child of Ala as wellas an ọgbanje, to be mothered by the god who owns lifeyet pulled toward death. We did the best we could.Because we came through gates that did not closebehind us, it was easy for us to make reality loose for theAda. We had one foot on the other side at all times; it wasnothing to step away from this world. And you must knowthis, you must see, how this world is a terrible and wickedplace. We sectioned off the Ada in lavish and extravagantfolds, playing fast with her memories. There are manyadvantages to a broken mind.When the Ada was a child and the neighbor’s son cameinto the room she shared with A uli, when he reached hishand between the Ada’s legs, under the cartoon nightgownshe wore, we decided that she did not need to rememberthe exact ripplings of his fingers. Not that time, or the timeafter, or the time after that. It continued until the Adawrote Chima a letter and asked him to stop inviting theneighbor’s son over late at night, which was when itstopped. We sectioned off the image of his silhouettebending over her bed, of his arm reaching. When theneighbor himself, the boy’s father, groped the Ada whenhe had her alone in his living room, when she was twelve,we did it again. We sectioned well—the Ada who wasbefore the sectioning was not the same child after thesectioning. When she reached back for the memory, itwould be as if it belonged to someone else, not her.There was only us; we couldn’t entrust her to anyoneelse. Saachi left and Saul was always at his hospital, andthe Ada was at the whim of Chima’s hands. He beat heroften because he could—he was the first son and thefirstborn, and she was his responsibility. The Ada foughtback, and cried for her human mother until she realizedthat it made no difference. Even when Saachi did return,once or twice a year, it was not real. “She will leave,”Chima reminded the Ada, when she tried to report him toSaachi, “and it will be just you and me again.” By the timehe raised a belt to her, the Ada knew no one would staylong enough to protect her.When we were first placed inside her, with thesehumans, the odds were that the Ada would survive. It was,in retrospect, a very low bar to set. She did not die, yes,but she was not guarded, she was violated, so as far as wewere concerned, they failed. This is why we have neverregretted stepping in, whether as ourself or the beastself.Show us someone, anyone, who could have saved herbetter.Sectioning the Ada gave her isolated pockets ofmemory, each containing a different version of her. Therewere versions to whom bad things had happened and,therefore, there were also versions of her to whom thesethings had not happened. The Ada could look back on herlife and see, like clones, several of her standing there in aline. This terrified her, because if there were so many ofher, then which one was she? Were they false and hercurrent self real, or was her current self false and it wasone of the others, lost in the line, who was the real Ada?We could not alleviate her terror because we would notallow a bridge between her and the past sections of her.We had separated them for a reason. Many things arebetter than a complete remembering; many things we doare a mercy.But there were still dangers involved in what we did;sectioning is a brutal exercise, after all, and it becameuncontrolled. The Ada was living in multiple realities atonce, floating loosely between them, forgetting what eachone felt like as soon as she moved to a new one. It was as ifshe had been thrown back into the open gates and wastrapped forever between realms. For her it was deeplyunsettling and felt like a developing madness. So the Adastarted marking her skin in new ways, to remind herself ofher past versions, tattooing her arms and wrists and legs.We accepted this because it was a worthy sacrifice; thereis little difference between using a blade and thisalternative, this ripping through the skin with multipleneedles, injecting ink until the flesh swells and leaks andbleeds. She had a thick sleeve of black ink tattooed downher left forearm, where she usually did the blood offerings,and she never cut herself again after that. We had allevolved.She even put a portrait of us on the high of her left arm,of herself staring out, of us peering over her shoulder withour mouth fastened to the junction of neck and trapezius, aphantom arm wrapping around her, a ring suspended inthe blankness. All these things she was doing to her skinmade her closer to us; it was like an advertisement, atimeline of sections, who she was on the inside beingrevealed on the outside. We have always been in supportof that, like when we carved up her chest. Knowing thatAla, in her cruel motherlove, would not permit us to returnthrough her mouth and into her womb, all we wanted nowwas wholeness. But when a thing has been created withdeformations and mismatched edges, sometimes you haveto break it some more before you can start putting it backtogether. And sometimes, when the thing is a god, youneed someone holy for that.Chapter Twenty-OneHow can one tell the story of a rain that fell on him,when he is ignorant of where the rain started falling on him?WeIt was good and correct that the Ada met the priest back inNigeria; some things must happen on home soil if they areto happen at all. It was in Lagos, yes, not back in theSoutheast where we were first born, but that wasacceptable because the priest was Yoruba, and with thesethings, compromises must be made. He was a sound artistwho lived in Paris, who had been away for fifteen years,who was pulled back just in time to meet us. He arrivedlike a torrent, so for this telling, let us call him Lẹshi.Lẹshi was a thin man, tall and dark-skinned, with eyeslined in kohl and lashes stroked with mascara. He watchedthe Ada from the minute he first saw her, before her eyesfound him, a private stretch of time. After they met, theymoved cautiously around each other for the first day or so,wearing flesh faces but smelling the things under theirrespective skins. We were intrigued by him—he reeked ofpower, of in-between-ness, and he advertised it freely. TheAda’s friends insisted that he must love men—no one, theysaid, would wear that much woman on their faceotherwise. But we recognized the marks Lẹshi displayed;we knew that they told what spaces he lived in, thoseliminal gutters. We wanted to sit with him because he feltlike how Ewan did the first time the Ada met him, thatimmediate click, that rightness with a faint promise ofchanging a life.Out in the parking lot on the second night, Lẹshi and theAda leaned against a car in the parking lot, away from thefloodlights.“Why don’t you come back to the hotel with me?” heasked.The Ada laughed and shook her head. He was astranger, but she was not afraid because we knew him,something in his marrow matched ours. Still, she refused.“I don’t want people to talk,” she said.Lẹshi looked at her, and his eyes were heavy andamused. “I can tell you now,” he said. “You’re going tocome back with me.”He was not being arrogant. He wasn’t human enoughfor that. The Ada hesitated, and Lẹshi tilted his head ather.“Since when did you care what they think?” he said, andwe stared at him through the Ada’s eyes, then we laughedbecause he was right. None of this mattered. They were allhuman complications; they would die with time—everything always died. The Ada left with him, to the whitenest of his hotel room, and it consumed her for the nexttwo nights.Lẹshi’s energy hummed against the walls and we fed onit, sealed inside a cocoon that rejected the city’s reality.“I felt you the minute you first walked into the room,” hetold the Ada as she curled up in an armchair. “So muchpower.”She blushed. “But I didn’t even say anything. You allwere rehearsing. I just walked in and sat down.”Lẹshi smiled faintly. “Yes,” he said. “Exactly. That’s allyou had to do and everyone knew you had entered theroom.”Asụghara grinned. “Do you mind if I shower?” sheasked, transparent as thin ice. We allowed it—to have thebeastself show was inevitable, we would let her play. Shestripped off the Ada’s clothes and ran the water and thepriest watched, still and relaxed. He did not touch her; hehad a lover back in Paris. Asụghara prowled and purredbecause she didn’t care; humans were predictable, full ofhunger and terrible at restraint. But as we were learning,the priest was not human, and so he smiled, immune to herbait, then coaxed and petted her until she gave in and laidher head on his thighs, naked and docile, the Ada’s bodystrewn over his sheets. Lẹshi remained fully dressed forthe two nights, keeping his head covered. Perhaps heknew what damage Asụghara could cause if he let heragainst his skin.“I can see you change,” he told us, his eyes narrowed ininterest. “Your body language. How you talk. Your eyes.You’re not always the same person, are you?”Understand this if you understand nothing: it is apowerful thing to be seen. We found ourself venturingtimidly from the Ada’s mouth, telling him about us, how wewere a misplaced god, how we were not human, how wehad divided the Ada’s mind. Lẹshi looked at the Ada in softawe—even a priest can be ministered to.“I’ve always felt like that,” he said, “my whole life, butI’ve never been able to articulate it the way you just did.”The Ada showed him her blackened forearm and the softraised scars that the ink was covering. The priest ran hisfingers over it, then rolled up his shirtsleeve to show herhis own. It covered his whole forearm—puckered, shinyflesh seized up in a keloid. “They reconstructed it,” he toldher. He had been performing; he had dug out the fleshhimself and fed it to the crowd. We understood. It is likewe said: when gods awaken in you, sometimes you carveyourself up to satisfy them.“I want you to last forever,” she whispered to him, theirfaces mirroring each other’s in the pillows. We ran herfingers over the skin of his cheek and his eyes shudderedclose.“Please,” he whispered back. “You have to stop that.”He had a lover already; we were not allowed to touch himtoo much.We cannot tell you the whole of it, the parts that do notfit into words, the parts that we have already sectionedaway for safekeeping. When gods are talking,eavesdroppers will be struck deaf. Be satisfied with this:Lẹshi told the Ada truths. He read her and prophesied andtested her, tested us. What are your fears? Why are youdoing this? No, that is a lie. Try again. That is also a lie.Stop being afraid. Yes, now you are telling the truth. Doyou see? When you say this, what are you trying to mold?Here is the edge of a cliff, do you have the liver to standthere? You should, you stink of power. No, you cannot holdmy hand. I am not yours, I am not really here. You have tostand alone, none of this works if you do not stand alone. Isee you. I won’t touch you, but I see you. Try it again.And just like that, in two nights with the moon shiftingslowly between phases, he reached inside us, through us,and he pulled the Ada out into the light. Believe, we wouldhave kept her inside our great shadow, but Lẹshi pushedhimself into her terrible loneliness, called her by all of ournames, then left, because some gates do close. The onlytime he kissed her was on the morning of his leaving, andwhen he was gone, we were bereft.Ah, we have always claimed to rule the Ada, but here isthe truth: she was easier to control when she thought shewas weak. Here is another truth: she is not ours, we arehers. We did not know who sent the priest to remind her(most likely it was our brothersisters) and we wanted to beangry, but Lẹshi had been a pit of beauty and we couldn’tfind enough anger to keep us afloat. Instead we let ourselfsink into him, into the space his absence had created. Werelived the two nights over and over; we plastered his faceall over the marble and wept at the loss of his voice. Whenthe sadness seemed like it might fade, we regurgitated itand rolled it, tragic and beautiful, around the Ada’s teeth.We did not section him, even though the mere thought ofhis face was heartbreak.The mourning of him became a ritual in and of itself, adramatic enactment of sorrow. The Ada stumbled around,blinded by memory. When you have been hiding in a greatshadow, it hurts to look at the light, to be awake, to feel.“I wish I had filmed him,” she told A uli. We wanted toproject him against a wall and play it on a loop, to watchhis jaw turn toward us a thousand times, until theelectricity finished, until our eyes collapsed.“He’s not coming back,” A uli said bluntly. She wasbeing kind, but we already knew he would not return; wehad felt the reverberation when he left. It was cruel, it wasunfair! Skins are not meant to shed so quickly—it was as ifhe had hooked his fingers into our eyes and flayed usneatly, peeling us raw. Who we were before Lẹshi laid hislong hands on us was not who we were afterward. No,afterward we were done. We were ready to stop the birthsand the namings—the Ada was ready to take her ownfront.When we fell back, it tasted like a kind of death. But asthe Ada moved out of our shadow and into her body, wefound ourself watching her with a grim pride. She wasscarred, yes, gouged in places even. But she was—she hasalways been—a terrifyingly beautiful thing. If you ever sawher at her fullest, you would understand—power becomesthe child. She is heavy and unbearably light, still hermother’s hatchling. Think of her when the moon is rich,flatulent, bursting with pus and light, repugnant withstrength.Yes, now you are beginning to understand.Chapter Twenty-TwoThe masquerade has moved into the arena. You will be flogged if youremain. Your ears will be filled with news if you run away.AdaWe have a saying back home: Ịchụrụ chi ya aka mgba. Onedoes not challenge their chi to a wrestling match. It feelsas if that’s what I’ve been doing for years now, wrestlingas if it could end in anything other than my loss. But it’s arelief to finally be thrown, to lie with my back on the sand,alive and out of breath. You can see the sky properly thisway. Besides, the sand is my mother and no one can runfrom her. They say that she can find you as long as yourfeet are touching the earth, and once she does, the earthcan split open like a pod and just swallow you up. There’sa story about a man called Alụ who tried to escape her byjumping from tree to tree like a monkey. He lived like thatfor years, floating in the treetops, and when Ala couldn’tfind him, she haunted the whole forest. His name becamethe word for taboo, and all taboos are committed againsther. Gods really do take things personally.I wish I could say that after Lẹshi, I became an obedientchild who listened to my first mother and walked with mybrothersisters, but I was too stubborn and I was stillafraid. I know how mad it sounds to call yourself a god.Believe me, I fought it at first. Let me ask questions, Ithought, and so I ended up in a restaurant in Lagosspeaking to an Igbo man, a historian. When I told himabout my others and my name and my first mother, heleaned over.“I cannot talk to you about these things in an airconditionedrestaurant in Lagos,” he said. “Youunderstand? But you are on the right path. This journey isthe right thing to do.”It should have been reassuring, but it only terrified mefurther. I wanted to stop there, but I couldn’t, because thiswas my life, you understand? No matter how mad itsounded, the things that were happening in my head werereal and had been happening for a very long time. After allthe doctors and the diagnoses and the hospitals, this thingof being an ọgbanje, a child of Ala—that was the only paththat brought me any peace. So yes, I was terrified, but Iwent back to talk to the historian again.“The name that was given to you has manyconnotations, you hear?” He wore glasses and spoke in arush of words. “The python’s egg means a precious child. Achild of the gods, or the deity themself. The experiencesyou’ve had suggest that there is a spiritual connection,which you need to go and learn about. Your journey willnot be complete until you do that.” He leaned back andfolded his arms. “There is nothing more anybody can tellyou. It’s important for you to understand your place on thisearth.”Sometimes, you recognize truth because it destroys youfor a bit. I fell apart that night, crying uncontrollably,throwing my phone against a wall and hyperventilatinguntil everything around me started to fade. I was at alover’s house, the painter, and he put his arm around me,holding me up.“Stay with me,” he said urgently. “Stay with me, Ada.”I was gone, inside my head, and I turned to my others.What does he mean, I asked. I’m not going anywhere.They frowned. We’re not sure. Even if you faint, you’llwake up.“Stay with me, please,” he begged.He doesn’t know what to do, I told them, and theynodded.Something has to be done, they said. Pick one of us.I looked at them and it was the same as looking atmyself. Asụghara, I said. She was older now, less brutalbut still efficient. When she stepped forward, I stoppedcrying.“I need to call my mother,” she said, using my mouth. Iwas already learning what this new balance could feel like,where I controlled how we moved. More and more, Irealized how useless it had been to try and become asingular entity.“Won’t your mother be worried?” the painter asked.Asụghara shook our head. His mother would panic, butSaachi was different, she was a selected human. Shewasn’t the type to fall apart just like that. When she pickedup the phone, Asụghara spoke between my gasps for airand kept her voice level. “I’m having a panic attack and Idon’t know what to do. Hyperventilating. Feel like I’mabout to faint.”Saachi replied with matching calm, her voice focused.“Have you eaten today?”“No.”“Your blood sugar is low. Where are you?”“At a friend’s house.”“Okay. You need to lie down, but first you have to eat ordrink something. Right now, understand?”I was drifting too fast. It took Asụghara a few momentsto find my mouth again, and when she spoke, our voicewas faint. “I don’t know.”Another mother might have let worry show in her voice,but Saachi had nearly had me die on her. This was nothingin comparison. “Is your friend there?” she asked.“Yes. You want to talk to him?”“Yes, put him on the phone.”Asụghara handed the phone to the painter and fell backinto the marble. It was too much to sustain, keeping afunctional self in front. I could hear the painter’s voice ashe spoke to Saachi, his tone anxious and respectful. Afterhe hung up, he brought me a glass of water and watchedme as I sipped it.“What do you want to eat?” he asked.Asụghara tried one last time. “I should lie down,” wesaid, but when I tried to stand, my legs were nothing. Icouldn’t walk; my body was too far away. I started cryingagain and the painter picked me up and carried me to hisbedroom. When he put me down on the bed, the hard foamof the mattress felt like ground. I turned on my side andpressed my cheek to it. The skirt I was wearing fanned outover the bed and cinched at my waist.“Breathe,” he was saying, bringing his face close tomine. His hand was on my skin. “Breathe.”It felt so much easier not to. It seemed outrageous toexpect my body to put in that much effort just to draw inair. For what?Just stop, my others suggested. You could just stopbreathing. It feels so easy.They were right, it did. I held my breath, but it didn’tfeel like I was holding my breath, it felt like there shouldnever have been breath. It felt like the entire concept ofbreath had been something I imagined. After all, my bodywas never meant to move like this. These lungs had tohave been built for show. They should never haveexpanded and I should never have been alive.The painter shook me, but my eyes felt heavier than coldmud. I fumbled to unzip the side of my skirt and thepressure on my diaphragm eased, but I was still drifting. Itwasn’t until he put a cold towel on the back of my neckthat the gray moved away, almost reluctantly. The fadingstopped and I fell asleep.The next morning, I was back in my body and thepainter was relieved.“It’s one thing to talk about your spiritual matters,” hesaid. He knew about the sections of my mind, my tongueand scales. “It’s another thing to see it.”I was confused. “What do you mean?”He gave me a look. “Come on, Ada. You almost went tothe other side last night.” I scoffed but he was serious.“That’s why I kept telling you to stay.”“I would have come back,” I said.He shook his head and I could see residual worry on hisface. “You don’t know that.”I fell silent. Maybe he had a point.“And you know what was the scariest part?” hecontinued. “I looked into your eyes and you weren’t afraid.You knew you were slipping away but you had peace inyour eyes.”I kept listening, and he searched my face from thepillow next to me.“It’s like your people were calling you and you werelistening to them. So I kept telling you to stay.”I smiled to reassure him and touched his cheek. “Thankyou,” I said. I couldn’t remember the last time anyone hadbeen afraid for me. I also knew it wasn’t by chance thatthis had happened while I was looking for answers to thesequestions I was afraid of. The historian was right—therewas nothing else anyone could tell me.I knew the brothersisters hadn’t been serious abouttrying to drag me over to the other side the night before.The thing about Ala is that you don’t move against her. Ifshe turned me back from the gates and told me to live,then I would have to live, ọgbanje or not. Even thebrothersisters weren’t reckless enough to try and disobeyher, which meant that they were just trying to scare me, orwarn me. It sounded like the kind of thing they would do. Ifthe wooden gong gets too loud, you tell it the wood it wascarved from.But like I said, I’m stubborn. I didn’t go to find Ala, noton that trip. I went back to America and called Malena andtold her what happened. She agreed with the historian.“You need to really know your roots, mi amor,” she said.“It’s a long journey, but once you get that started, you’llfeel much better. It’s difficult because you don’t reallyknow what you’re getting yourself into when you makeyour commitment with them, and it’s difficult becausethey’re overprotective of us. But you’ll have a better senseof self.” She paused. “You know how old you are? You’reolder than me, Ada. Spiritually, you’re older than me.You’re sixteen thousand years old. Because of who you are,because of who you’re born into. You have a differentname. You’re wiser. You just need guidance.”She sounded like a prophet, like someone was speakingthrough her mouth again.*I decided to start small, with prayer. The first night I triedit was because my mind was spinning out like it sometimesdoes, loud and uncontrolled. I was so tired. They werepulling at my thoughts, all of them. Sometimes I don’tdraw a line between my others and the brothersisters;they’re all ọgbanje after all, siblings to each other morethan to me. But I was so tired. How many years had I spenttrying to balance them, trying to kill them, defendingagainst their retaliations, bribing them, starving andbegging them? I used to try praying to Yshwa, but it’s likehe has no effect on them. I can see why Asụghara thoughthe was useless.So that night, I prayed to Ala. I didn’t want to do it inEnglish even though I knew she would understand;language is only a human thing. Igbo had always beenstunted coming from me, but there was one word that waseasy, that slipped from my tongue like salted palm oil andtasted correct.“Nne,” I said, and the word was double-jointed. Mother.I felt her immediately and the brothersisters lifted offmy mind in a hurried cloud. I was cast into a vast, emptyspace and everything around me was peaceful. It felt likethe otherworld—that’s how I knew that I was inside her,suspended and rocked.Find your tail, she told me, and her words slithered.They were silver and cool.Her voice came with meaning. I had forgotten that if sheis a python, then so am I. If I don’t know where my tail is,then I don’t know anything. I don’t know where I’m going,I don’t know where the ground is, or where the sky is, or ifI’m pointing away from my head. The meaning was clear.Curve in on yourself. Touch your tongue to your tail so youknow where it is. You will form the inevitable circle, thebeginning that is the end. This immortal space is who andwhere you are, shapeshifter. Everything is shedding andeverything is resurrection.The second time I called her, she said nothing. She justtook me and put me inside a calabash. I was tiny like ahatchling, lying against the curve and feeling the fibersbeneath me. I was curled up. I was so small and she waswrapped around the outside of the calabash, her scalespressed against the neck. No one would touch it once theysaw that she held it, which meant that no one would touchme.*It is hard to ignore a god’s voice, especially one like hers.The message was so simple; I couldn’t pretend not to hearit. Come home, my brothersisters sang. Come home andwe will stop looking for your trouble. I bent my neck andraised my hands and submitted. What else was there todo? You cannot wrestle with your chi and win. In this newobedience, I decided to go back to Umuahia and see myfirst mother. I knew it would be impossible to close thegates, but I was the bridge, so it did not matter. If I wasanything else, maybe I would’ve been uncertain and full ofquestions, looking for mediators or trying to speak to myancestors. But I had surrendered and the reward was thatI knew myself. I did not come from a human lineage and Iwill not leave one behind. I have no ancestors. There willbe no mediators. How can, when my brothersisters speakdirectly to me, when my mother answers when I call her?Like the historian said, you have to know your place onthis earth. It was very hard, letting go of being human. Ifelt as if I had been taken away from the world I knew, likethere was now thick glass between me and the people Iloved. If I told them the truth, they would think I was mad.It was difficult to accept not being human but still beingcontained in a human body. For that one, though, thesecret was in the situation. Ọgbanje are as liminal as ispossible—spirit and human, both and neither. I am hereand not here, real and not real, energy pushed into skinand bone. I am my others; we are one and we are many.Everything gets clearer with each day, as long as I listen.With each morning, I am less afraid.My mother draws closer now. I can see a red roadopening before me; the forest is green on either side of itand the sky is blue above it. The sun is hot on the back ofmy neck. The river is full of my scales. With each step, Iam less afraid. I am the brothersister who remained. I ama village full of faces and a compound full of bones,translucent thousands. Why should I be afraid? I am thesource of the spring.All freshwater comes out of my mouth.AcknowledgmentsFrom the very beginning.Enuma Okoro, for saying to me in a restaurant inProvidence, “Oh, you have to write the spiritual bookfirst!” For your friendship and the feedback on earlychapters. The painter, for tenderness and having my backwhen I started on this path. The priest, for breaking me.The historian, Ed Keazor, thank you a thousand times overfor being there.Tiona McClodden, for every moment of your unflinchingand active belief in my work, for inspiring me with yours.For the multiple ways you saw and supported me, forteaching me rigor. Christi Cartwright, for being anexcellent and meticulous reader. For always comingthrough with the industry insight and being my friend.Dana Spiotta and Chris Kennedy, for the first draftfeedback. The Creative Writing MFA Program at SyracuseUniversity, for funding me during the year in which I wrotethe book. The Callaloo Creative Writing Workshop wherethe book concept solidified and the Caine Prize WritingWorkshop where I finished the first draft. Cave Canem, forthe poetry workshops in which I wrote Chapter 15.Chimamanda Adichie, for the Farafina Creative WritingWorkshop and the ripples from that. For that momentwhen I started to tell you about the book and you tiltedyour head, looked at me, and said, “Ah, so you’re anọgbanje.”Binyavanga Wainaina, for making me cancel my Uber totalk about the work. For being such a staunch champion ofthis book and making sure it was taken care of. Youbelieved in it so much that I did too.To Eloghosa Osunde and Nana Nyarko Boateng, forreading the manuscript and giving me reasons why thiswork matters, for always seeing and loving me. Isaac OtidiAmuke, with all my love. You know why. Sarah Chalfant,Jackie Ko, and Alba Ziegler-Bailey at the Wylie Agency, forbeing amazing. My brilliant editor, Peter Blackstock, forbelieving.My mother, June, for letting me interview her and my littletwin sister, Yagazie, for that time when I was freaking outabout what I needed to believe in order to write this bookand you told me to treat it like I was a method actor, tosurrender. So I went in and never came back out, whichwas perfect. Also, for everything else. Thank you.The lovebears and squad, for being my community andchosen family. We all we got.Bobbi, mi hermana mi amor, thank you for everything. Andalways, my darling Rachel, for all these years of fierce andunwavering love.About the AuthorAkwaeke Emezi is an Igbo and Tamil writer and artistbased in liminal spaces. Born and raised in Nigeria, shereceived her MPA from New York University. She wasawarded a 2015 Miles Morland Writing Scholarship andwon the 2017 Commonwealth Short Story Prize for‘Africa’. Her work has been selected and edited byChimamanda Ngozi Adichie and published in variousliterary magazines, including Granta. Freshwater is herdebut novel.CopyrightFirst published in the UK in 2018by Faber & Faber LtdBloomsbury House74–77 Great Russell StreetLondon WC1B 3DAPublished in the USA in 2018by Grove Atlantic, 154 West 14th StreetNew York, NY 10011This ebook edition first published in 2018All rights reserved  Akwaeke Emezi, 2018Cover design by FaberAuthor photo   Elizabeth Wirija“Big Big World.” Words and Music by Lars Anderson and Emilia Rydberg.Copyright   1998 EMI Music Publishing Scandinavia.All Rights Administered by Sony/ATV Music Publishing LLC, 424, ChurchStreet, Suite 1200, Nashville, TN 37219. International Copyright Secured.All Rights Reserved. Reprinted by Permission of Hal Leonard LLC.The right of Akwaeke Emezi to be identified as author of this work hasbeen asserted in accordance with Section 77 of the Copyright, Designs andPatents Act 1988This ebook is copyright material and must not be copied, reproduced,transferred, distributed, leased, licensed or publicly performed or used inany way except as specifically permitted in writing by the publishers, asallowed under the terms and conditions under which it was purchased oras strictly permitted by applicable copyright law. Any unauthoriseddistribution or use of this text may be a direct infringement of the author’sand publisher’s rights, and those responsible may be liable in lawaccordinglyISBN 978–0–571–34541–0