I Cogitating Your Head OffKusters, Wouter. A Philosophy of Madness : The Experience of Psychotic Thinking, MIT Press, 2020. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/nyulibrary-ebooks/detail.action?docID=6388578.Created from nyulibrary-ebooks on 2022-02-11 02:13:48.Copyright   2020. MIT Press. All rights reserved.M.C. Escher’s “Earth”   2020 The M.C. Escher Company-The Netherlands. All rights reserved. http://www.mcescher.comKusters, Wouter. A Philosophy of Madness : The Experience of Psychotic Thinking, MIT Press, 2020. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/nyulibrary-ebooks/detail.action?docID=6388578.Created from nyulibrary-ebooks on 2022-02-11 02:13:48.Copyright   2020. MIT Press. All rights reserved.Introduction: Setting SailThis first part is an introduction to the philosophy of madness, and it offers a perspective onthe most important aspects of psychotic experiences. It considers the way the experience of“reality” changes (chapter 1), the way the difference between “inner” and “outer” isdetermined (chapter 2), and the way time and space are experienced (chapters 3 and 4). Thisattempt to plumb the depths of madness on the basis of four themes will demonstrate thatmadmen go through an existential rupture or radical reversal. Suddenly the light is shiningfrom a different direction, enabling them to see from a new perspective into a glisteningcrystal.This is the “earthiest” part of the book. Here I discuss and substantiate my view ofmadness, presenting philosophy and madness as seemingly straightforward and discretephenomena. In making a phenomenological observation, I look at what can happen to thefour types of “oars” we use to row through our daily lives (reality, the inner/outer world,time, and space) when they enter the ocean of madness. I closely examine thetransformations and fragmentations of these four concepts, and in eight fragments—scatteredamong the chapters—I show how this can work out in vivo. In so doing, I provide an initialsketch of the philosophy of madness and lay the basis for the discussions to follow.But this first part also contains something paradoxical: there’s an aspect of madness thatcreeps into philosophy, and vice versa. Confrontation with madness causes these same fouranalytical concepts, which we usually regard as the foundation of our existence, to fall apart,disappear, and become irrelevant. The philosophical discourse that comes face to face withmadness here also becomes contaminated, drawn into a pool of oscillation, confusion,ecstasy, and anxiety. In addition, it turns out that the various data from episodes of madnessreferred to here are already possessed of a fascinating and disruptive power, which vitalizesthe object level of madness and lays claim to philosophy.Kusters, Wouter. A Philosophy of Madness : The Experience of Psychotic Thinking, MIT Press, 2020. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/nyulibrary-ebooks/detail.action?docID=6388578.Created from nyulibrary-ebooks on 2022-02-11 02:13:48.Copyright   2020. MIT Press. All rights reserved.1 Realer than RealIt is in a sense paradoxical that nothing can be more real than the experience of unreality.—Carney Landis, Varieties of Psychopathological Experience1.1 Everyday RealismThe madman can cut some remarkable capers: he can travel through time, pirouette throughmirrors, and rediscover the world. An outside observer may think what he sees is imaginaryand has nothing to do with “reality,” but to the madman, his experiences can seem realer thannormal. So what does that say about reality and the realness of madness? Is the mad worldreal or unreal? What does the madman himself think about it? In this chapter, I will showwhat happens to the concept of reality when you reflect on it deeply, and what happens whenyou obsess on it—when you cogitate your head off.Let me begin with two examples of how madmen regard reality—or its absence. TheEnglishman John Custance wrote several vividly detailed books about his manic episodes. Iwill refer to Custance’s findings and analyses throughout this book. Writing about the degreeof reality present in his mania, he says in Wisdom, Madness and Folly (1952, 31), “If I am tojudge by my own experience, this ‘heightened sense of reality’ consists of a considerablenumber of related sensations, the net result of which is that the outer world makes a muchmore vivid and intense impression on me than usual.” Here Custance is talking about a“heightened sense of reality,” but elsewhere (1952, 73) he says, “… the whole universe ofspace and time, of my own senses, was really an illusion. Or it was so for me, at any rate.There I was, shut in my own private universe, as it were, with no contact with real people atall, only with phantasmagoria who could at any moment turn into devils. I and all around mewere utterly unreal.”Lara Jefferson describes the same ambivalence toward the degree of reality in madness inher 1948 autobiography, part of which was included in Bert Kaplan’s collection of firstpersonaccounts The Inner World of Mental Illness. First she writes (Kaplan 1964, 8),“Nothing is real. Everything is a wild toss of hallucinations of one kind or another about onething or another. … If I am to be awakened, I must awaken myself, for no one else can do it.But I do not know how. There is only a shadow remaining of the person I used to be. …Madness claimed me.” But then she goes on to contradict herself (Kaplan 1964, 18):Kusters, Wouter. A Philosophy of Madness : The Experience of Psychotic Thinking, MIT Press, 2020. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/nyulibrary-ebooks/detail.action?docID=6388578.Created from nyulibrary-ebooks on 2022-02-11 02:13:48.Copyright   2020. MIT Press. All rights reserved.Each crazy world is strictly private and cannot be shared by another. It is much more real than reality. For nothing thathappens to a sane mortal in the common-place world of ordinary living, can approach the startling intensity of things goingon in delusion. There is a sharpness, a shrillness, a piercing intensity which thrusts itself through the consciousness and is somuch more convincing than the blunt edge of reason, that even if the two are conflicting there is no choice between them.Reason is beaten, dismissed and defeated at the very outset, it cannot contend with the saber edge of delusion.1Both Custance and Jefferson insist that madness is realer than real but that it is also unreal.How is that possible? How are we to understand this? In the next four subsections I willanalyze what it means to live in the “ordinary real world.” What is so real about the ordinaryworld? Where did that idea come from? Why are some things and events normallyexperienced as real while others are experienced as unreal? After addressing these questions,I will examine the mad experiences that are described as extremely real and extremely unrealat the same time. I call the sense of extreme realness “hyperrealism,” which I analyze insection 1.2.1. The sense of extreme unrealness is called “hyporealism” (section 1.2.2), andthe term “pararealism” is used as an all-encompassing term for both.2 Pararealism thereforecomprises the contradictory experiences of realness and unrealness in one and the sameworld in which everyone lives. It can’t get any crazier than that, except in the last section(1.3), where reality is done away with altogether. But that’s good, too.When is something “actual,” “genuine,” or “real”? In ordinary life these concepts havemultiple meanings. A pair of jeans can be real (with an authentic label) or imitation (aknockoff). A film can be about something that really happened (a true story) or somethingconcocted (a work of fiction). Someone can really mean something or they can be lying.Unreal is imitation, made-up, artificial, or deceitful—all of which play a part in madness.One difference between daily life and the mad world is that we usually judge a single object,a specific film, or a certain opinion as real or unreal. But in the mad world, the entireexperience, the entire world, is real or unreal.What can psychiatry tell us about the experience of hypo- and hyperreality? Surprisinglylittle that is of any interest. For most practitioners in the fields of psychiatry, psychology, andpsychopathology, the question about the realness of the world is simply not relevant. Theworld is real, and those whose experiences tell them otherwise are engaging in somethingunreal. Psychiatrists and psychologists rarely consider the fact that some people experiencethe world as more than real or as totally unreal.3 And except for a handful of studies,phenomenological psychiatry does not pay much attention to the topic either. The onlyattempt to thematize and analyze the experience of unreality that I know of is the work of theresearchers Radovic and Radovic, but they go no further than trivialities. They conclude theiranalysis of experiences of unreality (2002, 279) with the remark that, at the core of the senseof unreality, there is “a distinct quasisensory or quasiperceptual state of immediate feelings ofunreality manifest as an ineffable atmosphere.” By speaking of “immediate feelings” and an“ineffable atmosphere” they are actually placing mad pararealism beyond the reach of furthercomprehension.Can philosophy help? In philosophy, the question of the realness of the world (“the realityof reality”) is answered in a number of ways. One of them—briefly put and greatlyexaggerated—claims that all the things we experience are just fleeting, unreal phantoms, andKusters, Wouter. A Philosophy of Madness : The Experience of Psychotic Thinking, MIT Press, 2020. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/nyulibrary-ebooks/detail.action?docID=6388578.Created from nyulibrary-ebooks on 2022-02-11 02:13:48.Copyright   2020. MIT Press. All rights reserved.that hidden behind each one is the thing that actually “is.” The real/unreal antithesis is alsounderstood as real observation versus illusion, or fact versus fantasy—as occurring betweenthing (“res,” from which we get “realism”) and idea (from which we get “idealism”), orbetween matter and spirit. These are all interesting aspects of “realness,” and they play abackground role in this chapter. Most of what philosophy has to say about realness is notimmediately relevant, however, because it usually has to do with human experience ingeneral, observation in general, and the order of the world in general. What is needed here isa form of philosophy that allows for variation and gradation with regard to experiences ofreality. After all, what we are asking is what it means to experience the world sometimes asreal and sometimes as unreal. So whether the world itself is real or unreal is not important;what is important is what the decisive elements are in bringing about an “experience ofrealness or unrealness.”After studying the experiences and assertions of psychotics, I have come to recognize fouressential factors, or dimensions, of “experiences of reality”: modality, subjectivity,temporality, and continuity. Although these concepts overlap, I will use them to analyze andunderstand experiences of realness, hyperrealness, and unrealness. But first I will show howthese four factors can help us understand our ordinary feelings of reality.1.1.1 Self-Evident BirdsThe first aspect of the experience of reality is what I call modality. In philosophy, this termrefers to anything having to do with possibility and necessity: to be obliged to, to be allowedto, to be able to; or necessity, capability, and so forth. In philosophy, possibility and necessityare regarded as opposite extremes. But the normal “real” world consists of neither limitlesspossibilities nor imperative necessities. The ordinary real world consists of things we take forgranted and seldom reflect on, along with the occasional appropriate doubt.Normally something is “real” for us as long as we don’t wonder whether it could beotherwise. For example, stones fall down; it is difficult to imagine that not being the case.Here, realness has to do with observation, expectation, and habituation. Whenever we beginto wonder why stones fall to the earth, we are also thinking about the imaginary possibilitythat they might not do so. But we immediately rule out such a possibility as “real” andexplain the falling by making reference to a “necessity,” such as a natural law. The way weexperience realness when we see a falling stone has to do with both reality and with ourthinking about reality. The fact that we see, think, and know that a stone is really fallingmeans not only that our thinking about it is “certain,” but also that stones fall in reality. Thereis no room for doubt here.A blackbird is a real bird, while a penguin or an ostrich are less-real birds. A blackbirdsatisfies all the characteristics of a bird; there’s no getting around the fact that it is a bird. It isa self-evident bird. Penguins and ostriches are also birds, biologically speaking, but they havefewer of the typical characteristics of a bird. They are less-self-evident birds; that is, we canimagine their falling under different categories.When we see a bat streaking past, we don’t immediately know how to categorize thisKusters, Wouter. A Philosophy of Madness : The Experience of Psychotic Thinking, MIT Press, 2020. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/nyulibrary-ebooks/detail.action?docID=6388578.Created from nyulibrary-ebooks on 2022-02-11 02:13:48.Copyright   2020. MIT Press. All rights reserved.flying creature. Does the bat lay eggs? Can it tweet? Is it really a bird at all? When we seeBig Bird on Sesame Street, we know he’s a so-called bird—and not a real bird. In the case ofthe bat and Big Bird, they appear to be birds, but this quickly gives rise to doubt. They arenot necessarily birds; they may conceivably, possibly, be something else—and in the case ofBig Bird, that is certainly true.If I see a rabbit, I take it to be a real rabbit as long as there is no reason for me to doubt theexistence of the rabbit “as rabbit.” The question “Did you really see a rabbit?” can beanswered in many different ways, depending on the context: “Yes, because I had binocularswith me,” “Yes, because its ears were shorter than those of a hare,” “Yes, because there werereal animals in the movie,” “Yes, because I was awake.” When we see the well-knownpicture of a duck that might also be a rabbit, we don’t say, “That is really a rabbit.” We say,“You might see it as a rabbit,” and we don’t think it’s as much of a real rabbit as others wehave seen.All such examples of realness are subtly different in meaning. Also compare (1) “Thatbird is real,” (2) “That is a real bird,” and (3) “That is really a bird.” Statement 1 seems topresent an antithesis: the bird is either living or made of plastic. In statement 2, the birdseems to have become a typical bird with the addition of “real.” In statement 3, the additionof “really” raises the strongest doubt. Despite these differences, the examples all seem tohave something in common: that the realness is always self-evident in an ordinary way.Things have to be as they are and not otherwise—then they are real. This “have to be as theyare” does not imply coercion or necessity so much as unconsidered acceptance orinevitability.Something is experienced as less real when doubt becomes strong and too much reflectionis involved. Is that animal flying there in the distance a real bird? When unrealness, illusion,or even deception is suspected, doubt and mistrust arise. A gold ring for ten dollars can’tpossibly be real. In Varieties of Psychopathological Experience (1964, 371), Carney Landis’svoluminous collection of first-person accounts of psychopathological experiences, the authorwrites, “Unreality occurs when there is a distorting quality in perceptual experience,” and“Unreality is used as a term to describe a fogging or dulling of perceptual experience.”Ever since the seventeenth-century French philosopher Ren  Descartes, doubt has beenthe accepted scientific method for arriving at a deeper level of realness by means ofprovisional, simulated feelings of unrealness. Those who methodically doubt certainopinions, sensory impressions, or supposed natural laws hope that such doubt will help themreach a “deeper” level of reality (compare this with the example of the falling stone). Thedoubt itself is articulated in a sense of unrealness.The unquestioned acceptance that something is what it is, is that much stronger whensomething is what it is in all of its facets. When actual events occur, we are caught off guardby reality and there’s no time for doubt, philosophical reflection, or mad negation. It’s lesseasy to claim that the bright red car tearing past us and blowing exhaust fumes in our faces isonly an image, a fantasy, or an interpretation. It isn’t a bicycle, it isn’t blue, and it doesn’tsmell like violets. The realness of events or things is more robust when more senses areKusters, Wouter. A Philosophy of Madness : The Experience of Psychotic Thinking, MIT Press, 2020. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/nyulibrary-ebooks/detail.action?docID=6388578.Created from nyulibrary-ebooks on 2022-02-11 02:13:48.Copyright   2020. MIT Press. All rights reserved.involved: a movie with sound is more real than a silent movie, a movie with Dolby surroundsound and a futuristic gimmick such as a “scent cannon” is realer yet.In her dissertation on virtuality and physicality Time Travel in the Cavern, Elke Müllerstudies the degree of reality in virtual environments and makes the following comment(2009, 288): “A thing is real for us when it appeals to all our senses; if an observationinvolves only one or two of my senses, the phenomenon can be dismissed as a ‘phantom.’” Athing or event is even more real when we not only observe it through several of our senses,but also when it “overwhelms our motor functions” in the sense that—as Müller says (2009,289)—there is evidence of “coherence between sensory involvement and motorial intention.”When a car is viewed on a movie screen, everything can still be asserted regarding itsrealness. But the car that crashes into me is “real” in yet another way. The more “motorialinvolvement” there is and the more senses that are addressed, the less its realness can bedoubted. The measure of the world’s reality decreases the more distance we take from it inphilosophy, science, art, or madness.1.1.2 Real Things, Real PeopleIf something is real, it isn’t just our idea about it that is true and actual; it is “really so” inreality. When things are determined less by reality itself and depend more on “how you lookat it,” their reality level drops. The duck/rabbit picture is less a real depiction of a rabbitbecause the appearance of the rabbit depends on how we see it. Watching a movie in 3D withthe help of special glasses is less real than seeing “real depth,” because seeing depth in 3D isdependent on our decision to put on the glasses in the first place. You’re more likely to say,“With these glasses, it’s as if you could see real depth” than “With these glasses, you can seereal depth.”In philosophy, this has led to a split between primary qualities (real, objective) andsecondary qualities (added by us, subjective). Thus the existence of color is less real than,say, quantity. Three red cars are really three cars, but their color depends on our ability toperceive color. In everyday life, we experience things as less real when we sense that theydepend on us—or on someone else. A party that is given because someone “felt like having aparty” is less of “a real party” than a party given to celebrate an objective, happy event.The less freedom we are allowed by events and things concerning the way we look atthem, the more we experience them as real. Müller (2009, 288) also recognizes this indescribing virtual unreality: “Real things possess a certain autonomy with respect to our ownknowledge and volition. … Reality has a way of being recalcitrant.” A passing red car is stilla car, no matter how we look at it. Therefore the material world is “more authentic” than themental world in a certain sense. Hard stones are real; liquid water is real—not because thesethings have lasting, eternal characteristics, but simply because I keep bumping into them inmy practical dealings with the world.Besides the objective compulsion of things that appear “natural” and “real” to us, there isanother compulsion created by reality: the compulsion of our fellow human beings. This isnot an objective but an “intersubjective” compulsion. For example, if I say, “I must interpretKusters, Wouter. A Philosophy of Madness : The Experience of Psychotic Thinking, MIT Press, 2020. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/nyulibrary-ebooks/detail.action?docID=6388578.Created from nyulibrary-ebooks on 2022-02-11 02:13:48.Copyright   2020. MIT Press. All rights reserved.his letter as an insult, since I cannot tolerate it when a perfect stranger addresses me in afamiliar way,” the letter is not yet “really” an insult. It isn’t a “real” insult until the letter isrecognized as an insult by the other person. In order for it to be seen as an insult, the letteritself—plus the way it is interpreted by others—must contain a certain necessity orunquestioned status. A letter is only really an insult if enough people agree it is.The more things take place in the head of one single person, and the less they areconfirmed by a community of people, the less real they are. At first glance, amorphousconcepts like democracy, love, and fame are still regarded as concepts that refer to realthings, although if we were to look only at their material tangibility, they might seem less real—since everyone knows this vagueness and uses it. But having visions of a rabbit, hearingthe voices of people who are not present, or interpreting numbers and symbols in anidiosyncratic way are all things that are not real—at least if they are part of the experientialworld of just one person. Something is only considered real when it becomes known thatother people see it in the same way. If I, in my freedom, think up something—something thatis not understood by others—it is less real than the things that are thrust into my field ofvision that I know others are seeing as well. For Müller (2009, 289), intersubjectivity is oneof the criteria for reality: “In the real world we are always connected to others and dependenton others, even in our perception.”4The decrease in realness corresponds, roughly speaking, with the increase in degree ofsubjectivity. On the one hand, there are hard, objective, real things, such as falling stones andtwinkling stars. Then there are things that are less real—things we “have all agreed to,” suchas the length of a meter, dictionaries, normative grammar, and the statute book. Even less realare the figments of my imagination and my ideas, such as the shapes I see in cloudformations or the memories that are evoked when I see a foreign city.5This connection between realness/unrealness and subjectivity can also be applied tofiction and art. In a certain sense, all art is “unreal,” since it is made by human beings. Artmight just as well not exist at all. Fiction is imaginary by definition and is strictly a humanproduct. But within the vast domain of all fictional entities, the strictly individual expressionsare the ones that are most unreal. If I sing a song, people may very well ask me if it’s a “realsong”—that is, an “existing song” that many people know—or something I made up myself.1.1.3 Real TimeIn everyday life, we differentiate between events from the past, events now taking place,events that we expect to happen in the future, and imaginary events that will never (or couldnever) occur. We say that events from the past are “real.” We can disagree over exactly whattook place in the past, but the fact that something did happen—and just one particular seriesof events—is something we do not dispute.In a certain sense, the past is more real than the present or the future, because the past isunchanging. What really happened does not depend on our will or our perspective. Althoughthe past is not known in all of its details, there is only one past, with interpretations (whichare less real, since they are subjective) of no more than one history (which is real, since it isKusters, Wouter. A Philosophy of Madness : The Experience of Psychotic Thinking, MIT Press, 2020. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/nyulibrary-ebooks/detail.action?docID=6388578.Created from nyulibrary-ebooks on 2022-02-11 02:13:48.Copyright   2020. MIT Press. All rights reserved.objectively “dated”). On the other hand, the past is less real than the present because it “doesnot exist” and “is not (or is no longer) reality.” It is also no longer observable and will neverbe present again. Assertions about the past can no longer be verified in the same way thatthose about the present or the future can be. Although the past “really happened,” it does notderive its reality from a sudden sensory or motorial event. The realness of the past has to relyon the authenticity, intensity, and reliability of memory.Because a single subject has little to sustain it in one’s own memory, it must seek supportin intersubjective agreement with regard to “what happened.” Something is a real memorywhen I, together with others, can look back on the remembered event. This doesn’t have to bean actual common recollection, but I must be able to trust that such a recollection is possiblein principle. If I cannot do that, then it’s only an illusion. My recollection becomes “realer”when I can also back up this intersubjective confirmation with objective proof, such asphotos and texts. Although the past is still gone, the same tendency adheres: “The lesssubjective, the more real.”The future is as unreal as the past in the sense of being “nonexistent,” but unlike the past,the future is going to exist at some point. The future arrives of its own accord; you cannot runaway from it. It is an actual, inescapable given. The past will never come again, but the futurehas yet to happen and is of real importance. The future is something to take into account, a“real fact.” When someone says that you “must be realistic,” that often means you must focuson the future and not on the past.Conversely, it is precisely because the future is not yet here that its contents are stilluncertain. Naturally there will be only one course of events, but we can influence thedirection that course will take. This makes the future less certain and less real than the past.Seen in this way, the future is no more than a fantasy, a fabrication, and a hope, and itbelongs to the unreal, the counterfactual.6In addition to the abstract but extremely real times of the past and the future, humanmethods for expressing time, such as clocks and calendars, also have a certain reality value.Mondays, years, and dates all have real meaning that we take for granted. In addition tocalendar time, which is determined by convention but still experienced as very real, time hasone more essential aspect: the difference between dead and alive. Death, or the time beforeyou existed and when you cease to exist, is not a convention to be followed like the calendar.Death is also not a given to be deduced from nature or experience. Yet death is a very realaspect of time. By analogy, being born is also a real, ineluctable fact of the past. A worldwithout death or birth is not a real world. A world in which you cannot die or into which youwere not born is not a real world either.1.1.4 Continuous ImpressionsOne last aspect of realness is continuity, a concept interwoven with temporality. If ourmemories and our lives are continuous, they are more likely to be experienced as “real.”Descartes used this prerequisite of continuity to distinguish between dreaming (unreal) andwakefulness (real). Phenomena that suddenly appear and disappear with equal rapidity mustKusters, Wouter. A Philosophy of Madness : The Experience of Psychotic Thinking, MIT Press, 2020. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/nyulibrary-ebooks/detail.action?docID=6388578.Created from nyulibrary-ebooks on 2022-02-11 02:13:48.Copyright   2020. MIT Press. All rights reserved.be dreamlike apparitions, according to Descartes ([1641] 1911, 32). He writes,for at present I find a very notable difference between the two [sleeping and wakefulness], inasmuch as our memory cannever connect our dreams one with the other, or with the whole course of our lives, as it unites events which happen to uswhile we are awake. And, as a matter of fact, if someone, while I was awake, quite suddenly appeared to me anddisappeared as fast as do the images which I see in sleep, so that I could not know from whence the form came nor whither itwent, it would not be without reason that I should deem it a specter or a phantom formed by my brain [and similar to thosewhich I form in sleep], rather than a real man. But when I perceive things as to which I know distinctly both the place fromwhich they proceed, and that in which they are, and the time at which they appeared to me; and when, without anyinterruption, I can connect the perceptions which I have of them with the whole course of my life, I am perfectly assured thatthese perceptions occur while I am waking and not during sleep.Continuity of experience (and the experience of continuity!) ensures that we live in realityand not in a dream. The requirement of continuity comprises two principles: (1) experiencesof wakefulness must be mutually connected (unlike dream experiences), and (2)representations or images are “real” only when we see them arise gradually and disappearslowly.The twentieth-century German philosopher Edmund Husserl connects this requirement ofthe gradualness of images with the structure of our time consciousness. The timeconsciousness he describes in his The Phenomenology of Internal Time-Consciousness(1991) is like a stream in which no sudden, unanticipated obstacles appear. (There is muchmore about Husserl and the “stream” of time in 3.1.2 and 8.3). When “discontinuouselements” do arise in our consciousness, we regard them at first as impressions and imagesthat have none of the characteristics of reality. These elements become real only if they canbe inserted into a more spacious, continuous, and coherent whole. According to Husserl, thepast as we remember it is only “real” when it can be linked to the present in a continuousstream of images and memories. The present itself is only “real”—not “d j -vu” or ahallucination—when it is internally continuous, an integrated unit consisting of somethingthat has just passed, something that is happening now, and something that is just about toarrive. Although Husserl does not say so himself, this same method can be used todistinguish between a real and an unreal future. A future that you can imagine or reach in acontinuous way from the present is real. When it can be reached only “by leap of theimagination,” it is unreal. Some future expectations and visions are realistic, while others aredeemed “not feasible,” “impossible,” or fanciful.This theme of “continuity of/in time” is actually even more complex. Two viewpoints arepossible. In one viewpoint, the continuity between event A and event B means that B followscausally from A. In that case, the experience of continuity and time is nothing more thanknowledge of the causal relationship between A and B. When A and B are not experiencedcontinuously, as in psychosis, it means nothing more (according to this viewpoint) than thatthe psychotic no longer possesses knowledge of the causal relationship between A and B.This viewpoint presumes that there is an “objective reality” in which causal relationshipsexist between events, and that these relationships can be known or remain unknown. Theexperience of unrealness here is understood as stemming from ignorance. More knowledgewould result in more reality.According to the other viewpoint, “continuity of/in time” is a characteristic of theKusters, Wouter. A Philosophy of Madness : The Experience of Psychotic Thinking, MIT Press, 2020. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/nyulibrary-ebooks/detail.action?docID=6388578.Created from nyulibrary-ebooks on 2022-02-11 02:13:48.Copyright   2020. MIT Press. All rights reserved.structure of the subjective experience, such as that of time consciousness (Husserl). In thiscase, the subject can still possess knowledge of the causal relationship between A and Bwithout having the experience of continuity between the two. I am basing myself here on thislatter viewpoint because, in this way, the psychotic experience can be understood. In hisphenomenological analysis Der Verlust der natürlichen Selbstverst ndlichkeit (1971, 88, 92),Wolfgang Blankenburg says of his patient, “She was clearly suffering from a lack ofcontinuity going back in time, but of an unusual sort. It was not about the relationship withwhat may be understood as an objective period of time, so it was not a memory defect. Yether relationship with the past had changed profoundly.” I will continue this discussion of themore temporal aspects of continuity—and the lack of it—in chapter 3.The requirements of continuity posited by Descartes and Husserl also seem to hold truefor daily life. Radovic and Radovic point to the influence that sweeping life changes can haveon the development of feelings of unrealness. When your life, your existence, and the worldsuddenly undergo a fundamental change, in both a positive and a negative sense, it can beexperienced as unreal: “My life seems like a dream (or a nightmare).” Many psychoses occuron the heels of profound life events, and the psychosis can be regarded as the consequence orthe expression of a “crack” or a “tear” in a person’s world or reality.7You use the continuity requirement to determine whether something really happened ornot. If I have a memory of being all alone in a strange city full of Chinese lettering, I regardthe memory as real if I am able to construct a plausible story about taking a trip to China. If Ihave never been to China, it would have to have been a fantasy or a dream.We seem to be inclined to standardize our stories and insights, or at least to locate themwithin integrated entities. Whenever something suddenly occurs that has nothing in commonwith what preceded it, it baffles us. So we try to connect it to something familiar and therebyto understand it in those terms. If we wake up and do not recognize our bedroom, and ifstrange things start happening, we try to understand how these things cohere with theprevious day. If that doesn’t work, we may think we’re “still dreaming.”In this section, I have discussed four dimensions that together constitute the feeling or theexperience of everyday realness: the measure or method of modality, subjectivity/objectivity,temporality, and continuity. With regard to the dimension of modality, the everyday world isneither limitless in possibility nor strictly determined; it is rather what we might call “selfevident.”It is neither purely subjective nor purely objective, but somewhere in between:“intersubjective-objective.” The real world is located not only in the present but isinterwoven—by means of “real” data, real clocks, and calendars—with a time axis or threadthat reaches out toward the future and back to the past. As for continuity, the “real world” is acontinuous world and permits only gradual change.1.2 Mad PararealismAbove I wrote about the four pillars of what, in philosophy, is called “naive realism”: theKusters, Wouter. A Philosophy of Madness : The Experience of Psychotic Thinking, MIT Press, 2020. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/nyulibrary-ebooks/detail.action?docID=6388578.Created from nyulibrary-ebooks on 2022-02-11 02:13:48.Copyright   2020. MIT Press. All rights reserved.basic experience of realness and reality. These everyday feelings of realness are maintainedby means of stories, symbolic forms, conventions, and common sense (also see my analysisof the mad experience of time in chapter 3 et seq.). In the experience of mad pararealism, andin much of philosophy, this naive realism, cloaked in an everyday, heedless knowing, iscalled into question, examined, placed within quotation marks, forgotten, or denied. Whenthat happens, one or more of the pillars can shift, causing our grasp or sense of reality to shiftwith it. The net effect may be that reality becomes realer (hyperreal) or less real (hyporeal).In philosophy, this results in fine theories, systems, and stories that, in a certain sense,remain impractical or “unreal”—unreal in the sense of everyday reality: naive realism. Suchphilosophy argues that the world is entirely necessary as it is, or that freedom does not exist(determinism), or that the subject essentially determines everything (idealism), or that themind or consciousness doesn’t really exist (reductionism, materialism).Analogous results occur in madness. The madman finds himself in a world that heexperiences as imperative or determined, in which he also no longer experiences his thinkingas free but as coerced or dictated by an external power (determinism). Or his world is one inwhich his thoughts and moods have an immediate effect on the colors, movements, andpatterns of the outside world (idealism).What leads to profound, conceptual edifices in philosophy leads to hermetic pararealismin madness. In later chapters, I will discuss this theme in greater detail based on thephilosophy of Wittgenstein, Schelling, and Sartre, and the madness of Custance andSchreber, among others. In the rest of this chapter, I will look at each of the four pillars(modality, subjectivity/objectivity, temporality, continuity) and show how certain shifts canstrengthen our experiences of realness (hyperrealism in sections 1.2.1.1 through 1.2.1.4) orweaken them (hyporealism in sections 1.2.2.1 through 1.2.2.4).1.2.1 Hyperrealism1.2.1.1 Strong powers Mad hyperrealism is marked by coercive compulsion. Doubts,possibilities, and choices make way for indisputable certainties, necessities, and duress. Ananonymous madman in Kaplan (1964, 94) says, “At the onset of panic, I was suddenlyconfronted with an overwhelming conviction that I had discovered the secrets of theuniverse, which were being rapidly made plain with incredible lucidity. The truths discoveredseemed to be known immediately and directly, with absolute certainty. I had no sense ofdoubt or awareness of the possibility of doubt. In spite of former atheism and strongantireligious sentiments, I was suddenly convinced that it was possible to prove rationally theexistence of God.” (Also see the citations from Custance and Jefferson at the beginning ofthis chapter.)The madman can no longer keep things at a distance; rather, things and their meaningsthrust themselves upon him. They are “realer” than normal. He can no longer ascertain howhe sees them. The color of the sweater being worn by the news broadcaster must havesomething to do with the color of the logo of a transport company. Everything that happenshas a necessary, ineluctable meaning. Nothing is “for no reason,” “random,” orKusters, Wouter. A Philosophy of Madness : The Experience of Psychotic Thinking, MIT Press, 2020. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/nyulibrary-ebooks/detail.action?docID=6388578.Created from nyulibrary-ebooks on 2022-02-11 02:13:48.Copyright   2020. MIT Press. All rights reserved.“coincidental” anymore. There’s no escaping it; everything must be as it is. A sense ofurgency arises. Life seems to be part of a thrilling plot (or conspiracy). Denouements,unravelings, and “revelations” are constantly taking place; everything is becoming clearerand more unambiguous. The sense that the whole world “just is” has changed to the sensethat the world “must be” as it is.These strange experiences, which are difficult to describe, are often interpreted andformulated as religious or quasi-religious. The aura of “must” that the madman hasdiscovered can take the shape of a “supreme power” who forces the world upon him. It mightbe an evil power, so that the intrusiveness is that of coercion and persecution. The strongpower can also be experienced as benevolent, as a giver or a creator. In that case, theexperience that everything must be as it is, is one of gratitude and ecstasy. In manypsychoses, positive tones of hyperrealism alternate with negative ones; one minute you’re apersecuted victim, and the next you’re an all-powerful overlord. Enlightened, certainly. Anddark as well. And at some moments both enlightened and dark at the same time (see chapter10 et seq.).1.2.1.2 The compulsion of things The feeling of “must” implies that you are beingcompelled by “how things are.” The subject is no longer able to resist; the objects take over.When you cannot arm yourself against the impressions things make, when you let yourself bedictated to by how everything is, then the world becomes unequivocal, everything is lockedin place, doubt disappears, and realness increases.The madman experiences the world of hyperreality as an “objective given.” Usually we alldo. Falling stones are what they are, and many events take place in a way that we simply takefor granted. In hyperreality, however, this is much more intense. Things must do what theydo. There is no freedom, choice, or arbitrariness. You must make the obvious connectionsbetween things. You can see them, after all: the meaningful glance of the news broadcaster,the waving flag, the bicyclist slowly lurching back and forth. That can’t be happening for noapparent reason. It’s realer than real. As Custance writes (1954, 1), “And yet it was as alunatic that I saw something, a vision as it were of the whole universe from a completelydifferent angle, which was so overwhelming that even in my sanest moments I cannot helpattributing to it a measure of validity.”The madman sees compelling, deeply meaningful patterns in the fluttering of birds and thezooming of insects. There can be no arbitrariness in a flock of birds, no freedom to fly wherethey will. They fly exactly as they’re supposed to fly—as God or nature has ordained.Schreber gives a wonderful example of where this leads. (Daniel P. Schreber’s autobiographyMemoirs of My Nervous Illness has made him one of the most well-known “experienceexperts.” He and his work will be discussed in detail in section 13.4.) While we normallymight respond to an annoying insect with a lighthearted comment such as, “Here comes thatwasp again—right on time,” Schreber (1988, 185–186) experiences that “right on time” asfollows (I have italicized the phrases that are most typical of and relevant to this chapter):“My most important observation is, that for years I have experienced direct genesis (creation)through divine miracles certainly on lower animals and I still experience it around me hourly.Kusters, Wouter. A Philosophy of Madness : The Experience of Psychotic Thinking, MIT Press, 2020. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/nyulibrary-ebooks/detail.action?docID=6388578.Created from nyulibrary-ebooks on 2022-02-11 02:13:48.Copyright   2020. MIT Press. All rights reserved.I have gained the certain conviction that … such life is due to the purposeful manifestationsof divine power of will or divine power of creation. … These animals always appear ondefinite occasions and in definite order around me; they appear so frequently that there is nodoubt of their being each time newly created; they cannot possibly have existed before andonly been driven into my company accidentally. For instance, I can expect without fail, infact I can predict, that as soon as I sit down on a bench in the garden and miracles close myeyes, which would in a short time lead to sleep through a union of all rays, a fly, wasp orbumble-bee or a whole swarm of gnats appears to prevent me from sleeping.”8A haze of necessity is spread across the human world as well. Whatever others do is notthe result of free will; it happens because it cannot not happen. Humans are driven bydirectives, by “how it must be done.” They comply with a law, a power, a force, or a divineprovidence. They are marionettes who do only what has already been dictated. If you’rewalking down the street and someone smiles at you or gives you an angry glare, it isn’t just acoincidence. It’s part of necessity, part of the indisputably objective patterns in the world.This gives the entire mental domain, every free transaction, a mechanical, determinedappearance. As such, people become predictable stereotypes. They play roles without anyimprovisation, like actors who have escaped from a film set or like figures from a familiar,mythical story. They exhibit the Plan that underlies all of reality (see chapter 15).The psychoanalyst Marguerite Sechehaye wrote about the recovery of one of her patients,known simply as Renee, in a much-discussed book that includes a first-person account of thegirl’s own experience of psychosis, Autobiography of a Schizophrenic Girl (1970). ThereRenee comments (29−30):Around me, the other children, heads bent over their work, were robots or puppets, moved by an invisible mechanism. Onthe platform, the teacher, too, talking, gesticulating, rising to write on the blackboard, was a grotesque jack-in-the-box. Andalways this ghastly quiet, broken by outside sounds coming from far away, the implacable sun heating the room, the lifelessimmobility. … Suddenly the street became infinite, white under the brilliant sun; people ran about like ants on an ant-hill;automobiles circled in all directions aimlessly; in the distance a bell pealed. Then everything seemed to stop, to hold itsbreath, in a state of extreme tension, the tension of the needle in the haystack. Something seemed about to occur, someextraordinary catastrophe.To the madman, fellow human beings seem to lose their free will. They obey “objectivelaws of nature,” which give their actions and movements a more confident, fixed appearance.Their transformation into stereotypes makes them “realer,” as they are more “emphatically”present. At the same time, the disappearance of fellow humans makes the world “artificial,mechanical, electric,” as Sechehaye’s Renee puts it. It becomes simultaneously hyperreal andhyporeal.1.2.1.3 Circular time If wasps fly according to God’s will, if people on the street move“as was decided in the Plan,” and if the rain comes down “at exactly the right moment,” theneverything is already determined. Everything is predestined, everything is part of the Plan,and there are no real surprises. Whatever is happening now, whatever happened in the past,and whatever is going to happen is all repetition and the expression of the “fundamentalpattern.” In the normal world, there is history, there is real change, and there are irreversibleevents. In the mad world, there is only the eternal repetition of the same pattern.Kusters, Wouter. A Philosophy of Madness : The Experience of Psychotic Thinking, MIT Press, 2020. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/nyulibrary-ebooks/detail.action?docID=6388578.Created from nyulibrary-ebooks on 2022-02-11 02:13:48.Copyright   2020. MIT Press. All rights reserved.This applies to the ordinary patterns of day and night, sleeping and waking, eating anddrinking, and going to the bathroom. When it gets dark in the evening, the madman sees it asthe manifestation of the Eternal Falling of Night, and the evening meal is like the LastSupper. Everyday events become connected to the pattern of hyperreality. Someone walkinginto the room becomes an expression of the Entrance into the Room. A woman with aworried face is the manifestation of Mary Watching Her Son’s Passion. This hyperreality isoften experienced as “cinematic” (also see 15.3). If everything is the manifestation of thePlan, then everything is a “planned symbol” of a script. The script and the film cover theentire cosmos and are more intense, more important, and therefore more “real” than ordinarylife. Taking the place of the “rippling” linear time of ordinary people is a new structurewhose principle is the degree of proximity to the Plan or the Script. The Script is sacred.Whoever recognizes that is sacred as well and finds himself somehow closer to the light,plunged more deeply into hyperreality (more about this in chapter 14 et seq.).When you see existence in terms of repetition, then its distinctive “basic form” is thecircle. Everything returns. There is a succession of events, but they all happen in a circle. Thesense of repetition that comes with the experience of “circular time” also brings with it thesense that “you can see what the point is”—the point around which all circles revolve. Yousee the very heart of the whole, you are in the center of the cosmos, and everything revolvesaround that one point. All antitheses converge there. This point is neither beyond nor withinyourself but is the core of all seeing and thinking, the only real reality—and hyperreality. Asthe famous Neoplatonic philosopher Plotinus ([AD 270] 1956) wrote in the third century(6.5.119), “Time is like a radial line running out apparently to infinity but dependent uponthat, its center, which is the pivot of all its movement; as it goes it tells of that center, but thecenter itself is the unmoving principle of all the movement.”The discovery of “circular time” can be experienced as liberating as well as frightening.Sechehaye’s Renee describes mainly the dead, mechanical side of returning patterns: thecircles offer no opportunity for escape; the conspiracy keeps revolving, in constant pursuit.But it can also amount to an experience of time in which the great is reflected in the small athousandfold, and the small is dizzyingly interwoven into the great—and a feeling of awe,astonishment, and holiness may arise (see part IV).1.2.1.4 Impressions of unity In her autobiography, Elisabeth Farr (1982, 3) writes,“There were times when I could see the room breathing, the walls expanding and contracting.I had a word for this very special feeling that came over me when I had these perceptualexperiences: I called it the Super Real … a sinister feeling of meanings locked behindmeanings. A lamp was not just a lamp; it had a personality and was trying to communicatewith me. A chair was not just a chair; it seemed more real than reality itself. It scared me.”Usually we make a distinction between reality and fiction, with the “requirement ofcontinuity” playing an important role (see section 1.1.4). In madness, when the experience ofsensing continuity evaporates, impressions of events may not seem connected anymore;everything may become like loose grains of sand, where nothing seems “real” (see section1.2.2.4). But what I am discussing here is the possibility that all impressions may be “loose”Kusters, Wouter. A Philosophy of Madness : The Experience of Psychotic Thinking, MIT Press, 2020. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/nyulibrary-ebooks/detail.action?docID=6388578.Created from nyulibrary-ebooks on 2022-02-11 02:13:48.Copyright   2020. MIT Press. All rights reserved.and discontinuous but real nonetheless. What does this mean?Let’s look at this by comparing it with a dream. In a dream, every image is experienced asequally real. There is no difference between fiction, an idea, or a “real” dream event. Every“bright idea,” every “image,” is real in the dream—as it also is in madness. The fact that thenumbers on the license plate of that red car are the same as my age is a “real fact,” asimportant and significant as any other possible connection. It doesn’t matter that thisremarkable observation is out of sync with (“not continuous with”) other observations orideas.The Swedish playwright August Strindberg writes about his period of madness in TheInferno (1912, 45–46): “The knight looks towards the wall, and following the direction of hisgaze I notice something written on the mortar with a piece of coal. It looks like the letters Fand S interlaced, which are the initials of my wife’s name. She loves me still! The nextmoment I see, as by a flash, that it is the chemical symbol for ferrum (iron) and sulphur, andthe secret of gold lies revealed before my gaze. I search the ground and find two leaden sealsfastened together by a string. One displays the initials V. P., the other, a king’s crown.Without committing myself to a further interpretation of this adventure, I return to Paris withthe lively impression of having experienced something bordering on the marvellous.” (Insections 6.2.3 and 16.1.1, I will discuss more fragments from Strindberg.)The notion of causality can further clarify this “realness of discontinuity.” In the dream(and in madness), image B does not first have to be causally induced by image A in order toqualify as a genuine dream image. All images and impressions are equal when it comes totheir reality value. My age does not have to have caused the number on the license plate toappear in order for the relationship between the two of them to seem “incredibly real.” Inother words, the requirements for what qualifies as “real” have been somewhat eased.In normal life, it is the collection of causal relationships, the continuum of events, thatcreates the sense of reality. But in madness, all noncausal relationships also play a part. Assoon as you associate two things in a mad situation, “something real” is created. To think ofsomething is to create it. To think up a word is to invent something. To argue a point is tocreate a world. It is often thought that madmen mean whatever they say in the same way thatpeople normally mean things—that they experience their mad fabrications as reality. And thatis true—after all, their reality is a hyperreality. But just remember that hyperreality does notconsist of causal relationships. If you ask a madman if his age caused the number on thelicense plate to appear, he will deny it. In that sense, he’s not crazy. But in madness, “thethought alone” is enough to create an experience of reality. In madness, the word becomesflesh, and thoughts are like sugar.Finally, to inject an element of doubt into the argument: it isn’t at all clear where theborder should be drawn between causal relationships and noncausal associations. By whatcriterion should causal relationships be distinguished from noncausal relationships? Someargue that “logical thinking” is what might distinguish causality from association and factfrom fiction. Serious attempts to make a case for this idea usually fail, which leads somethinkers to believe that causality is actually no more than habit or convention. With this lastKusters, Wouter. A Philosophy of Madness : The Experience of Psychotic Thinking, MIT Press, 2020. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/nyulibrary-ebooks/detail.action?docID=6388578.Created from nyulibrary-ebooks on 2022-02-11 02:13:48.Copyright   2020. MIT Press. All rights reserved.empirical or Humean notion, reality and nonreality, madness and normality, are based onnothing but common sense and habits. In that case, the alleged bizarre world of madness ismerely strange, because it is essentially unconventional rather than illogical (also see myargument in Pure Madness [Kusters 2004, 37 et seq.]).1.2.2 HyporealismIn her autobiography, Lenore McCall (1947, 22) says, “Although I still inhabited the world Ihad always known, my mind and spirit had definitely crossed the border into that land ofunreality, of shadows in which I was to live for five years.” And Landis (1964, 39) writes,“Another frequent phenomenon that is most distressing and astonishing to mental patients isone they refer to as a feeling of unreality.” In this section I will describe cases in which areduced sense of reality, or unreality, has been experienced—that is, experiences ofhyporeality rather than hyperreality. How are these cases to be understood in terms of thefour notions of modality, subjectivity/objectivity, temporality, and continuity/discontinuity?1.2.2.1 A quagmire of possibilities Many cases of madness do not involve necessityor compulsion; rather, they involve possibility and freedom. Nothing is self-evident orunambiguous; everything is open to doubt, everything seems indefinite. This can result in asense of unreality.In 1971 Blankenburg, in his famous work Der Verlust der natürlichenSelbstverst ndlichkeit, describes what he believes is the essential feature of psychosis: theloss of the everyday framework that we live in but that we rarely talk about or reflect on. Hedescribes one case in great detail, that of “A.,” who made the following few statements:“What is wrong with me anyway? Something small, silly, but so important that you cannotget beyond it. I need to be connected—to a family, for example. Without a fundamentalrelationship everything becomes artificial. … Every individual has to know how he ought toconduct himself, everyone has a certain way of acting and thinking. Everyone lives accordingto specific rules governing the things he does, in society, but I don’t have such a clear set ofrules for myself. I am totally devoid of principles, which is why everything goes wrong,because everything is supported by everything. …”The “self-evident” quality that A. is missing is not a kind of well-defined knowledge thatyou can grasp in words that tells you know to live, act, speak, and think. What is missing,rather, is the background that makes it possible to think, speak, and act at all. A. does nothave any of the unconscious rules that underlie daily life in practice. One of the patients inGiovanni Stanghellini’s fascinating philosophical-psychiatric study Disembodied Spirits andDeanimated Bodies: The Psychopathology of Common Sense says something similar (2004,5): “Everyone’s talking to each other and I can’t figure out the mechanism. Is it really asecret? Are the others all talking in code? One day the day will come and we’ll see that it’sall quite mathematical. … I’m missing the backbone of the rules of social life. I feel like anothing and I feel real cool, at the same time. I don’t have any rules. I have to learn them.”When the facts and rules we normally take for granted disappear, the madman ends up in asituation of more than ordinary doubt. He begins doubting the basic principles of existenceKusters, Wouter. A Philosophy of Madness : The Experience of Psychotic Thinking, MIT Press, 2020. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/nyulibrary-ebooks/detail.action?docID=6388578.Created from nyulibrary-ebooks on 2022-02-11 02:13:48.Copyright   2020. MIT Press. All rights reserved.and remains uncertain about the possibilities and connections that are irrelevant in normallife: the meaning of the shape of clouds, the ambiguity of commonplace metaphors, thenumber of sugar lumps in tea, the nonfunctional similarities between objects, the numericalcorrespondences between license plates and other “data,” and so forth. He is no longer ableto see the path through the forest for all of the possible trees.The raging doubt goes beyond everyday brooding and simple reflection and often involvesphilosophical themes: Will the sun rise tomorrow? Do other people exist? Does the fate ofthe world depend on what I think? Is the thought I am thinking “my” thought? Do the things Isee really exist when I look the other way? The normal flow of everyday life, somewherebetween the banks of the mandatory and the optional, turns into an ocean—or a quagmire—of unlimited possibilities.In his study Psychosis without Psychiatry (2000, 138), Thomas Bock quotes a Mrs. Hahn:“That’s when the psychosis began, when the anxiety turned to panic, when I no longer hadcontrol over myself, when a possibility for me became the only possibility, and whenthoughts and fantasies turned into experiences. … I found out how terrible it is when you canno longer stop your thoughts from thinking, when nothing in life is certain anymore, whenyou immediately start doubting everything. The fact that you’re no longer fit to live a normallife and are literally a victim, an object of your own thinking, speaks for itself.”10 This is alsocalled hyperreflexivity.11 Please note that a high degree of hyperreflexivity therefore leads toexperiences of hyporeality.The American psychologist and psychosis expert Louis Sass has commented thatschizophrenics often make use of phrases like “the so-called,” “what is normally known as,”and “as if.” Such expressions indicate an ironic or distanced attitude with regard to thelanguage being used and the world.12 There isn’t just one way of indicating things; thenumber of possible ways of speaking, or possible languages, is enormous. You might saysomething one way, but you can just as easily say it another way. Language and world searchfor each other, but they never find each other.13The clarity of “that’s just the way things are” disappears and is replaced by “that’s oneway to look at them.” The appearance of the world is not the real reality but is only “one wayfor the world to present itself.” This creates an atmosphere of artificiality that covers thewhole world. It could just as easily have been different, so the fact that it exists means that itwas “made that way.” It’s like a dream or a movie. One of the patients of Meyer and Covi (inLandis, 1964, 255) says, “It is like a constant sliding and shifting that slips away in a jellylikefashion, leaving nothing substantial and yet enough to be tasted, or like watching amovie based on a play and, having once seen the play, realizing that the movie is adescription of it and one that brings back memories and yet isn’t real.”One of Janet’s patients (Landis 1964, 360) says, “Doubtless I see everything, withoutdoubt nothing is changed, except that things are not real … what I see is only a play, a Punchand Judy show; it’s clumsy, vulgar, unpleasant and, above all, false; it doesn’t really exist.”(Also compare my discussion of movies like The Truman Show in 15.3.1.)Earlier in this chapter, I described the hyperrealism of this cinematic feeling, but oddlyKusters, Wouter. A Philosophy of Madness : The Experience of Psychotic Thinking, MIT Press, 2020. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/nyulibrary-ebooks/detail.action?docID=6388578.Created from nyulibrary-ebooks on 2022-02-11 02:13:48.Copyright   2020. MIT Press. All rights reserved.enough this feeling can also be experienced as hyporealistic. If you think you’ve landed in amovie, you might be conscious of the fact that there has to be a real world outside the movie:the place where the movie was conceived and from where it would be regarded as unreal.This perception corresponds with the vague feeling experienced by many madmen that“something has yet to happen,” that there’s still a code they must crack, a corner they mustround, and that when they do, they’ll be standing face to face with the truth—or with thedirector of their movie. The world is pregnant with meaning, and it won’t be long before thatmeaning is revealed in every detail (also see section 15.3.3).Hyporeality has a great deal to do with the way in which the psychotic relates to theworld. The less someone is involved in the world with his senses, the more readily he will cuthimself off from everyday matter-of-factness and end up in a hyporeal world. If you view theworld exclusively from the outside, you are more likely to experience a sense of unrealnessthan if you throw yourself into the world heart and soul. There also seems to be a differencebetween the various senses. When visual observation is dominant, it’s easier for madness todevelop. Visual observation is better at lending itself to the psychotic attitude of “it alldepends on how you look at it” than auditory observation. The sense of hearing andespecially the sense of touch are least likely to lend themselves to what Sass calls “alternativeworlds, or orientations towards experience” (see section 1.2.2.4). It is easier to “look atsomething differently” than to “hear something differently” or “feel something differently.”141.2.2.2 The world in check When ordinary matter-of-factness has disappeared, and thecommon, everyday world has been shunted aside or rendered insignificant, the madman maydevelop a feeling of total freedom. Things no longer compel him, as in the case ofhyperreality; rather, he compels things—and other people, too. All possible worlds seem todepend on him; he is a god on the surface of his thoughts. In hyporealistic madness, objectivefacts become subjective interpretations, and intersubjective practices become subjectivewhims. This is also called the collapse of common sense (compare Stanghellini 2004). Thisnotion overlaps with the matter-of-factness of Blankenburg in the sense that it refers to quiet,conventionally implicit knowledge and skills. Common sense refers to what people generallyregard as sensible, customary, and normal ways of thinking and acting. Stanghellini says(2004, 79), “Common sense is a conventional wisdom regarding practical matters, a type ofknowledge whose intention is not theoretical, but practical.”When natural matter-of-factness or common sense disappears in hyporeality, other peopletake on the unreal aspect of phantoms. They are no longer “real others” but turn intomarionettes and extensions of the mad self. They are counterfeit, unreal, imaginary. Schreberdescribed others as inauthentic apparitions, or unreal “improvised” figures. Sechehaye’sRenee (1970, 25–26) writes, “One day, while I was in the principal’s office, suddenly theroom became enormous, illuminated by a dreadful electric light that cast false shadows.Everything was exact, smooth, artificial, extremely tense; the chairs and tables seemedmodels placed here and there. Pupils and teachers were puppets revolving without cause,without objective.” In his evocative, beautifully written autobiography The Witnesses (1967,45, 89), Thomas Hennell writes, “Presently they seemed less to have been real people thanKusters, Wouter. A Philosophy of Madness : The Experience of Psychotic Thinking, MIT Press, 2020. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/nyulibrary-ebooks/detail.action?docID=6388578.Created from nyulibrary-ebooks on 2022-02-11 02:13:48.Copyright   2020. MIT Press. All rights reserved.horrible counterfeits set there by the Spirit Sarcastic, to mock me and turn me out of my way.… The day was drugged to insensibility: its persons and its conventions puppet-like andunreal.”15Sometimes even ordinary things have no independent existence. What a chair, a bird, or acamera are, and what they signify, is no longer supported by what others think of them. Whatremains is a mad subject who no longer experiences continuity or stability, either in hisperception or his thinking. As one of Meyer and Covi’s patients says (in Landis 1964, 256),“For what is, is, and yet what seems to be is always changing and drifting away into thoughtand ideas, rather than actualities.” Mad hyporeality is unstable. Nothing is constant. Everycorner of the world is under the influence of the madman’s capriciousness. The psychoticsees the effects of his most intimate thoughts and actions in the most remote and distantplaces. As Sass writes (1992, 278), “The world of schizophrenia seems to have a ratherdifferent cast, one more reminiscent of philosophical idealism or solipsism … the objects ofschizophrenic perception are often felt to have a subjectivised status—to be somehow unrealor to depend for their existence on the subject who observes them.”16 The tree that themadman sees is no longer a tree but a tree-seen-by-me (also see section 2.2.1). Thissubjectification also involves derealization. The madman may determine everything, but thatmakes everything less real. A thing gains in “realness” if it is independent from what youmay think about it. As one of Stanghellini’s patients (2004, 6) says movingly, “How can thisworld be real, when it is only seen through my brain?”171.2.2.3 Dreamtime In section 1.2.1.3 I talked about hyperreal, sacred circular time. Butwhen the madman perceives that somehow he is the focus, source, creator, or “director” ofthe Plan or the movie, the experienced time is instead hyporeal dreamtime.In timeless, mad, quasi-eternal space, there is no longer a stable, recognizable past thatmight give the madman a sense of familiarity and security. Each moment is distinct from thelast and is entirely “new” (see chapters 3 and 4). Speaking of the “realness” of such an(eternal) present, one patient says (Hackett 1952, 51), “It was just that sometimes I had aterrific sense of unreality. Suddenly I found myself in the present and all the immediate cordsto the present had been severed. Like when someone wakes up in a strange room. Except thatI had lived in the room for months.”Normally we regard yesterday as having preceded today and the day before yesterday ashaving preceded that. Behind us—or “beneath us”—lies a stable past. In the case of madness,this past becomes a spring from which the psychotic freely draws in order to fill his present.The purpose of the past is to serve a changeable and all-dominating mad subjectivity. For themadman, each moment harks back to another moment from that past. He reaches for animage from ten years ago, a shred of an idea from last week, or a TV image about somethingthat happened five hundred miles away, and he fills his present with them.The past springs back to life in the (eternal) present. It becomes “indefinite,” or at least itcomes within reach of the psychotic’s power to define it, making it seem “impending” and“possible.” As such, things that are over and done with get another chance in the mad world;they are no longer “really pass .” Normally we suppose that there is only one real past, whichKusters, Wouter. A Philosophy of Madness : The Experience of Psychotic Thinking, MIT Press, 2020. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/nyulibrary-ebooks/detail.action?docID=6388578.Created from nyulibrary-ebooks on 2022-02-11 02:13:48.Copyright   2020. MIT Press. All rights reserved.is finished once and for all, and that at the very most there are different interpretations of thispast. But in the mad world, interpretations go wild, and hyperreflexivity affects commonsense views of the past. Not only are interpretations of the past changeable for the madman,but the past itself can be changed by him as well. It can be influenced. It is no longer finishedonce and for all, and the borders between past, imagination, fantasy, and expectation begin toblur. Because of the increase in subjectivity, not only does the unchangeable past enter thepsychotic’s sphere of influence, so does the distant future, which is lived out in the here andnow. Hope, expectations, plans, and fantasies are realized right now in the madman’s mind.In the psychotic eternal present, stories from the distant past mingle with plans, anxieties, andfantasies about the future. In mad pararealism, Napoleon and Stalin stroll the streets of Braziland join in the Dutch “orange fever” during the World Cup. If France plays Russia,Napoleon’s brutal march to Moscow is relived, and if the referee is Japanese, he becomes areference to an Asian aspect of history and culture. What makes this even more unreal is thatsuch delusions never really surprise the psychotic; there is nothing compulsory about them.At the same time, while the eternal, mythical struggle of the Olympian gods branches outinto orange caps, logos on soccer shoes, and snatches of conversation in the street, itcontinues to retain something unreal, something subjectively hyporealistic. The World Cupmovie is real, grander in scale than all the other soccer matches held elsewhere, but it’ssimultaneously no more than a fleeting, insubstantial dream. The World Cup myth remains anisolated, solitary event. Someone who stands alone, waving a flag and shouting, is morelikely to be overcome by a sense of unreality than when thousands in a stadium are doing thesame thing at the same time. Another reason why the World Cup delusion feels unreal isbecause it’s so capricious. Right in the middle of a game, the madman can become intriguedby a billboard, the glance of a fellow spectator, or an idea, instantly changing the World Cupmood into something else—an Islamic or an Islamophobic mood, for instance. Finally, whatalso gives the World Cup delusion a sense of unreality is that, although the madmanexperiences the World Cup as an important event—something of consequence that he isinvolved in—at the same time, he realizes that he himself is determining how Moscow, forexample, is involved in the Plan.I have described the cyclic time of the madman as hyperreal because the plot of the movieis convincingly real for the madman himself. At the same time, however, the mad movie isexperienced as unreal. The buildings are part of the set, the people are actors playing a rolefor the madman, and all of the events are artificial and fabricated. For just beyond thishyporeal movie, there must be something real of which the movie is a mere rehash. Perhaps abetter alternative to the movie metaphor might be the idea of a dream, or that of a disorderedcollection of photographs or scrambled movie scenes.Lived time changes in the mad world and so does the status of death. In psychosis, deathtakes place within the subjective experience of the present. One’s own death, which isnormally a “not yet” event, is experienced in psychosis as “right now.” Death becomesvisible through a crack in space (also see 3.2.3.3). On the one hand, this makes death moreKusters, Wouter. A Philosophy of Madness : The Experience of Psychotic Thinking, MIT Press, 2020. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/nyulibrary-ebooks/detail.action?docID=6388578.Created from nyulibrary-ebooks on 2022-02-11 02:13:48.Copyright   2020. MIT Press. All rights reserved.real in psychosis; death is objectified, or turned into an object. On the other hand, death isunreal in the sense that the madman seems to have control over it.1.2.2.4 Photos without frames In section 1.2.1.4, I argued that the loss of continuitycan lead to experiences of hyperrealism. If continuity disappears, however, the absence ofconnections between moments can bring about hyporeality, and that is what I want to focuson here. A patient of the French psychiatrist Eug ne Minkowski (1933, 308) says, “I amliving in the moment, in the momentary. I no longer have a sense of continuity.” The loss ofcontinuity means that the present becomes disconnected from the past and that the variousmoments that make up the past are no longer tacitly understood to be connected to eachother. One of Sass’s patients (1992, 156) says, “I feel as if I’ve lost the continuity linking theevents in my past. Instead of a series of events linked by continuity, my past just seems likedisconnected fragments. I feel like I’m in the infinite present.”This is consistent with what was said in the earlier sections (especially 1.2.1.4): if the“glue” of continuity dissolves, the experience disintegrates and the psychotic finds himself inhyporeality. Discontinuity results in fragmentation, and fragmented, broken time isn’t “real”time at all. A random collection of consecutive images does not constitute a real movie. (It isimportant to note that each of the images is hyperreal, hence the hyperreality of 1.2.1.4). Oneof Caroline Brett’s patients (2002, 327) says, “Time has disappeared. Not that it is longer orshorter, it’s just not there; there are bits and pieces of time, shaken and mingled; often there isno time at all.” (Also see chapter 3.)When “continuity”—despite any correct knowledge of causal relationships—is no longerable to string the beads together into “a series of events,” then there’s no longer anydifference between beads that belong to the necklace and beads that don’t. The differencebetween memory and fantasy disappears, as does the difference between history and fiction.When the psychotic tries to “orient” himself, he finds he can no longer rely on a stable pastbecause of this lack of continuity. Each time, he must create a new story about how he endedup here. The chronology in such psychotic narratives is, to put it mildly, unconventional.So the psychotic no longer knows (or rather “experiences”) where he comes from or whatcame before what. Each situation presents itself as unique. He stumbles from one discourseor semantic field to another, from one interpretation or possible world to the next. Sass (1992,131) says, “The schizophrenic seems to have a simultaneous awareness of severalpossibilities, frequently moving, or hesitating, among what are experienced, at leastimplicitly, as alternative worlds, or orientations towards experience, thereby demonstratingwhat has been described as a characteristically schizophrenic tendency to shift not merelyamong a variety of objects or topics but among alternative frames of reference, universes ofdiscourse, or semantic strata.”Such a world, in which apparitions come and go without clearly indicating where theycome from, resembles the dream world of Descartes described in section 1.1.4. Speaking ofhis own psychotic experience, Custance (Kaplan 1964, 58) remarks, “With visions areassociated dreams. When in the state of acute mania it is not always easy to separate the two.There is a very close correlation between dreams and waking thoughts and imaginings. IKusters, Wouter. A Philosophy of Madness : The Experience of Psychotic Thinking, MIT Press, 2020. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/nyulibrary-ebooks/detail.action?docID=6388578.Created from nyulibrary-ebooks on 2022-02-11 02:13:48.Copyright   2020. MIT Press. All rights reserved.wake up and my mind carries on the same train of thought which has begun in a dream. I goto sleep and go on dreaming about the subjects I have been thinking about.”Continuity acts like a thread that “holds the whole thing together.” It provides reliablestability, imparts unity and direction to time, and divides fact from fiction and dream fromreality.18 When this continuity falls away, each aspect becomes realer than real, or hyperreal,while everything taken together becomes unreal, or hyporeal.1.3 The End of Reality1.3.1 Real LifeMadness can be both superreal and unreal, all at the same time: hyper- and hyporeal. AsLandis says (1964, 373), “It is in a sense paradoxical that nothing can be more real than theexperience of unreality.” Now we know that this is because the four factors underlying theexperience of realness—necessity, subjectivity/objectivity, temporality, and continuity—canoppose each other. If your neighbor is transformed into a Roman henchman and wants to nailJesus to the cross, that constitutes a break with previous experience. Suspecting that yourneighbor is building a wooden shed in order to let you see that he has something to do withthe making of a wooden cross is so at odds with—and detached from—earlier ideas that itgives you a feeling of unrealness. At the same time, such an insistent realization and such anintense observation can make you experience it as hyperreal. Another example: the idea orexperience that you are living eternal life at this very moment can feel unreal, because pastand present can no longer be distinguished. At the same time, it is an intensely “real”experience, because events that took place in the distant past (historical decisions about lifeand death) are now vividly and urgently intruding on the present.This ambiguity about what “real life” is can also happen in nonpsychotic life. On the onehand, when we witness intense experiences and allow ourselves to be swept along by them,we call it “real life.” But when intense experiences constitute a severe break with the past,life becomes unreal, like a dream—or a nightmare. The mad world, like normal life, is madeup of this combination of realness and unrealness, but it is divided up in a different way.Passers-by may become unreal shades, while a photograph in the newspaper may make arealer-than-real impression. Whether the sun will rise tomorrow is less than certain, while thescarf that the news broadcaster is wearing provides very real clues about the near future.Further, hyper- and hyporealistic feelings are not only divided up differently—they arealso more intense and extreme. Their contrast with normal experiences of reality (andunreality) is vast, and their sheer strangeness makes them stand out. As a result, the leveling,subduing effect that comes with everyday common reality is gone. Normally, when somefabulous dream experience throws us off-balance, it strikes us as “funny.” We are confidentthat we can recognize the borders of Fantasyland when we see them. But the madman nolonger knows how to get out of the fairy-tale forest. And on top of that, the supermarket has away of turning into a fairy-tale forest and the fairy-tale forest into a supermarket.The question of whether madness is “real” or not plays a role outside the world ofmadness as well. After a period of madness, the madman and those close to him spend a lotKusters, Wouter. A Philosophy of Madness : The Experience of Psychotic Thinking, MIT Press, 2020. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/nyulibrary-ebooks/detail.action?docID=6388578.Created from nyulibrary-ebooks on 2022-02-11 02:13:48.Copyright   2020. MIT Press. All rights reserved.of time dwelling on what happened. There are, in principle, two possible (and extreme)reactions: the psychosis was real, or it was unreal.When the realness of the psychosis is emphasized, the focus is on the objective, coercivecharacter of the experience. Everything was so intense, the world in which the madmanwalked and the thoughts and feelings he experienced were so insistent, that he isn’t likely toshrug them off and preserve them as “realer than real” memories. Sometimes the intensity ofthe mad world leads one to deduce from it a kind of “hypertruth.” In other words, strongintensity makes one suspect that strong truth is at work: “It must make sense, because thefeeling was so strong.” An intense experience of timelessness, for example, can lead amadman later to deduce that “in the mad world you can travel through time.” Or anexperience of seeing the Virgin Mary can lead him to deduce that “Mary really appeared tome.” It is not possible, however, to deduce the existence of a thing from the privateexperience of that thing, let alone to distill any truth from that experience.Yet this kind of thinking is not unusual. At all times and in all places there have beenpeople who have called upon an extra strong insight, an extraordinary experience, a specialmeditation technique, a scientific way of thinking, or a social position that they believe grantsthem privileged access to “real, real” reality and truth. Madness, too, is sometimes regardedas a secret passageway to a realer reality. The contents of a mad experience are seized uponand believed as an objective claim to truth, surpassing the claims of the normal world. In theancient past, this happened when people who had divine visions were eager to convert theirexperiences into resounding texts and social prestige. In more recent centuries, romanticschools of thought often placed the poet side by side with the mad genius, as both werestruck by insights thought to be inaccessible to normal human beings.At the present time, there is a movement of “spiritually oriented” counselors and“experience experts” who regard madness as a special form of “hypersensitivity.” Examplesinclude John Watkins in Unshrinking Psychosis: Understanding and Healing the WoundedSoul (2010) and John E. Nelson in Healing the Split: Madness or Transcendence (1990).Some in this movement see these mad experiences as a special route to levels of reality thatare closed to others. One example of the latter is Fransje de Waard in Spiritual Crises:Transpersonal Psychology as Perspective (2007). Although there are many interesting ideasat work in this movement, “positive” spiritual breakthroughs are set apart from “negative”psychotic breakdowns with striking regularity and without any satisfying explanation. In DeWaard (2007), for example, a number of people talk about their various “spiritualexperiences.” Quite a few of them admit to having been initially afraid that they mightbecome psychotic but then certainly did not become so. On the contrary, unlike psychotics,they came away with deep spiritual insights. It seems to me that the danger of such opinionsis that they give rise to a new criterion for what “a good psychosis” ought to be and that, as aresult, people with “spiritually unjustified psychosis” are given the brush-off. (I will dealwith this further in section 14.3.2.) While the mad genius is venerated at one end of thespectrum, at the other end the madness is dismissed out of hand. The latter happens muchmore often than not and, therefore, needs to be resisted with force. The seemingly irrelevantKusters, Wouter. A Philosophy of Madness : The Experience of Psychotic Thinking, MIT Press, 2020. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/nyulibrary-ebooks/detail.action?docID=6388578.Created from nyulibrary-ebooks on 2022-02-11 02:13:48.Copyright   2020. MIT Press. All rights reserved.language of the madman leads some to believe that the mad experience itself is meaningless,senseless, or even devoid of substance. This entire book is an attempt to negate this idea andall the psychiatric practices that go with it. Within the context of realness versus unrealness,when the outside world denies that an experience of madness is real while the madmanhimself experiences it as “hyperreal,” it neither does the madman any good nor makes themadness any more comprehensible. It is sad that many psychiatrists are entirely unable orunwilling to understand madness, that they hold it in contempt or even fear it while at thesame time boasting about their “expertise” because they are thought to be able to explain oreffectively subdue it.For many former psychotics, psychiatric contempt for deeply intense experiences isreason enough to turn away from psychiatry and to talk to the psychiatrist “on the surface” (ifat all) in order to avoid future confinement. In their heart of hearts, many former psychoticswould rather cherish their memories of the black light than adopt the dead medicinallanguage of the psychiatrist. Often these memories are not only cherished but also longed for,consciously or unconsciously. Podvoll, about whom I will have more to say in part II, writes(1990, 72), “In the aftermath of a psychotic episode … one often feels as though somethinghas been left undone; a suspicion of incompleteness, even long after a psychotic experience.For some, this manifests as an unceasing demand that the ‘truth’ of psychosis be experienced,just one more time.” For the psychiatrist who insists that a psychosis is all a matter of anxiety,this is incomprehensible. In part III, and in chapters 13 and 14 of part IV, I will show what itis that the madman longs for so intensely.1.3.2 FracturePsychosis is like a fracture—a discontinuity—that cannot be defined in terms of what isbroken. Think of a stick with a bend in it, a leg with a knee, a line with a curve, or a foldedpiece of paper. The bend is not made of wood, the curve is not the line itself, characteristicsof the fold cannot be deduced from the qualities of the paper. In part IV the focus is on thefracture and the experience of brokenness.On the temporal plane, it’s all about a fracture in time. Many psychoses are expressions ofa gap between two time periods: an abyss, an “unground,” a crisis, or a “caesura.” There issome fundamental event that divides life into a period before and a period after. This divisionis the psychosis. The psychosis is like the ax that splits the wood, the knife that cuts a wound.Within that wound, trauma, gap, fracture, or crisis, themes circulate from the previous andthe coming periods. But the essence of the psychosis itself cannot be reduced to that gap. The(non)structure and the (non)foundations come from elsewhere, from the existential quagmirethat forms when a person has left the normal, everyday, common sense world. The knife isnot the incised flesh, the ax is not made of wood. Mad time does not issue from the previoustime and is not a prediction of what is to come; rather, the madman drops out of ordinaryhuman time.The fracture can be seen as “something in time,” but it can also be seen as a discontinuityin space. The passage from, say, one country to another can be experienced in the form of aKusters, Wouter. A Philosophy of Madness : The Experience of Psychotic Thinking, MIT Press, 2020. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/nyulibrary-ebooks/detail.action?docID=6388578.Created from nyulibrary-ebooks on 2022-02-11 02:13:48.Copyright   2020. MIT Press. All rights reserved.psychosis. If there is no gradual transition from Afghanistan to life in the Dutch countryside,a cavity can open between the two places, a non-place that is experienced as psychosis. Asfor temporality, the psychosis is an event that can be noted on the calendar—at least that’show it looks from the outside—but the madman knows that he has slipped out of ordinaryhuman time. Likewise, the mad Afghan refugee is neither walking around “with his head stillin Afghanistan,” nor “confused by the forests of the Netherlands.” You might depict thesituation that way geographically, but he knows he has slipped out of normal human space.The fracture can also consist of a separation from another person: a broken relationship, adeath, a leave-taking. Of course such breaks are interwoven with breaks in time and space.Taking leave of the Afghan family in terms of space, taking leave of a deceased child or aloved one in terms of time. The loss of the other can endanger and destroy the continuoussense of self.Seen from the outside, the madman still lives among others in a community and in theeveryday world; however, he himself realizes that he has fallen away from the normal humanworld and has landed in the world of lonely madness. The fracture can be understood as atear in the ordinary world. Those who are able to observe the tear and to peer through it cansee what’s behind it all—see the “wiring” of the world. And sometimes, in a flash of“unwiring,” the unfiltered light can be seen, the light that causes blindness and strikes withmadness (also see section 4.3.3).1.3.3 Dreaming with Your Eyes OpenOne of the shortest, most cogent definitions of psychosis is “dreaming with your eyes open.”That is how the famous Swiss psychologist Carl Gustav Jung put it (1974, 163): “To say thatinsanity is a dream that has become real is no metaphor. The phenomenology of the dreamand of schizophrenia are almost identical, with a certain difference, of course; for one occursnormally under the condition of sleep, while the other upsets the waking or conscious state.”Sanford (1977, 95) simply says, “In a psychosis the difference between inner and outerreality is obscured. It is like living in a dream when awake: the dream reality is so strong thatthe individual loses the common psychological perspective of his fellows and he becomes‘crazy.’” This image of the dream also appears in reports by madmen themselves. Schreber(1988, 81) writes, “Furthermore the impressions which rushed in upon me were such awonderful mixture of natural events and happenings of a supernatural nature, that it isextremely difficult to distinguish mere dream visions from experiences in a waking state, thatis to say to be certain how far all that I thought I had experienced was in fact historicalreality.”Dreaming and madness do have a great deal in common. Both are similarly fragmented:neither dreaming nor madness has a chronological storyline, and there are no calendars orclocks to keep events in order. Things that happen in both dreams and madness do not fallinto a structured sequence until afterward, when the person has awoken. The setting of thedream also resembles the setting of madness. In the dream there are disconnected images andmovements like falling and flying, but the setting is not an “objective space” or a stableKusters, Wouter. A Philosophy of Madness : The Experience of Psychotic Thinking, MIT Press, 2020. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/nyulibrary-ebooks/detail.action?docID=6388578.Created from nyulibrary-ebooks on 2022-02-11 02:13:48.Copyright   2020. MIT Press. All rights reserved.framework where things take place. There is no difference in the dream between frameworkand image as there is no difference in madness between close up and far away, backgroundand foreground. The notion of “dreaming,” like the notion of madness, is closer to “solocreation” than to “observing a common world.” “The dreamer dreams his dream” means thathe makes it “within himself” rather than observing it “from without”—which also holds true,mutatis mutandis, for the madman. Finally, as in the mad world, lots of creatures populate thedream, but never any “real people.”It is said that a dream takes place only in your body or brain and is no more than aphysical sensation. Hence dreams are delusions, the dreamworld is unreal, and the dreamends when you open your eyes. But this idea loses validity when applied to madness. For ifthe dream ends when you open your eyes, what do you do if you are mad and your eyes arealready wide open? Would it be better for the madman to close his eyes instead? Is hereceiving too much of the outside world, too much light? Maybe there are many ways to keepyour eyes open or to “see the light.”The remarkable thing about dreams—and madness—is that they can surprise you, eventhough you yourself are the dreamer (or the generator) of your own dreams. It’s as if therewere something hidden in the dream, an unpredictable aspect of “reality” that has slippedaway from you, the dreamer. The same is true of madness: within the mad world you cantransform the entire normal world according to your own delusions or Plan, yet unexpectednew things still happen that are beyond your control. So what is it that surprises you in yourdream and your madness, if dreams and madness take place only within yourself?Another strange phenomenon is “lucid dreaming.” In lucid dreams, you know you aredreaming, that nothing is “real,” and that as soon as you wake up you’ll find yourself outsidethe dream and in the real world. Stranger still, you can even dream that you decide to wakeup, that you try to awaken, and that you think you have succeeded—at which point you endup in another dream reality. Such odd twists also occur in psychoses. Sometimes you knowyou’re in a psychotic state, although that doesn’t mean you can shut down the psychosis atthat point and just walk away. And even if you know what state you’re in and walk awayfrom it, that step itself can be psychotic. Jefferson (Kaplan 1964, 7) writes this about herpsychosis: “The whole thing is a dream and a nightmare. … Oh, I am sure it is all a dream.… Presently, I shall wake up and be oh, so relieved to know that this all has been a dream. …Dreams seem quite real as you dream them, but how quickly they pass; when I awake I shallbe able to laugh at this nightmare. …” Madness sometimes seems like an endless videogame. You can change levels, there are plenty of exits, but you never “really” get out of thegame (see 15.3.3).In madness—just as in dreams—our everyday ideas about thinking, observing, time,space, and reality all disappear. If we focus on eliminating these elements, we tend tounderstand the mad world in a negative way. But glimmering behind it are the contours of aworld that has to do with themes such as eternity, light, darkness, and numerology. Moreabout this in the next chapter.Kusters, Wouter. A Philosophy of Madness : The Experience of Psychotic Thinking, MIT Press, 2020. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/nyulibrary-ebooks/detail.action?docID=6388578.Created from nyulibrary-ebooks on 2022-02-11 02:13:48.Copyright   2020. MIT Press. All rights reserved.Notes1. For more about what it means that madness is “more intense,” see section 10.1.2.2. The term “pararealism” is related to the equally apt “surrealism.” I am not using the latter term, however, because it is toofrequently associated with the twentieth-century movement of the same name. Moreover, “surrealism” has a connotationwith “hyper” that is too strong and a connotation with “hypo” that is insufficient.3. Even in psychoanalysis, the school of thought that claims to be sensitive to subjective experience, there is somethingcalled a “reality principle” that mad people are said to be unable to comply with. According to this principle, the madmanwithdraws himself (or his libido) “from reality.” We hear very little about where he goes or what further meaning the placeof withdrawal might have; we are told only that it is “fantasy” and not “reality.” I am not aware of any nuanced analysis ofwhat psychoanalysis actually means beyond common sense when it talks about “reality.”4. Müller (2009, 289) even goes so far as to defend the idea that all objectivity is based on intersubjective agreement: “Thesun doesn’t set unless I am not the only one to notice it.”5. Many things and experiences, such as numbers, individual taste, and pain, are not easily ranked in terms of a onedimensionalstandard of realness.6. Unrealness with regard to the past and the future is also expressed linguistically. In many languages, references to pastand future events are given shape by the same usage as references to the uncertainty of events. For example, past tense andfuture tense verb forms can be used to describe events that have to do not with time but with uncertainty: “He wentswimming if the water was warm,” “He will probably be swimming,” and so forth.7. This accords with the increasing emphasis in psychiatric literature on the connection between trauma and psychosis.8. In section 13.4, we will see that this meditation on “right on time” is both a source of madness (in Schreber’s case) and asubject of philosophy (for Wittgenstein).9. This three-figure code refers to the number of the ennead, the tractate, and the section respectively.10. In section 11.3.4, Bock and a case from his book will be discussed in greater detail.11. Sass (2003) writes, “Hyperreflexivity refers to a kind of exaggerated self-consciousness, a tendency for focal,objectifying attention to be directed toward processes and phenomena that would normally be ‘inhabited’ or experienced aspart of oneself.” Sass and Parnas (2001) describe hyperreflexivity as “the reflexive awareness of aspects of experience thatare normally tacit or presupposed.” Parnas, Bovet, and Zahavi (2002) call it “an excessive tendency to monitor, and therebyobjectify, one’s own experiences and actions.”12. Paul Moyaert (1983) describes this as follows: “A schizophrenic fascinates us because he confronts us with the ultimategroundlessness of any process of meaning. … The knowledge involved in my discourse comes up against a radical nonknowingthat mocks my certainties. … The knowing of a schizophrenic contains a limitless yet intolerable irony with respectto our discourse. The schizophrenic confronts us with the staggering cleft and gaping chasm of a radical non-knowing. Andthis non-knowing can no longer be understood as a knowledge that is not yet known; in the face of this non-knowing we arepowerless, and we can no longer defend ourselves.”13. Radovic and Radovic (2002, 277) also make note of this “as-if” quality, but in my estimation they are completely offtarget. They fail to mention the aspect of possibility but instead see it as a kind of clumsy language because it would be “toodifficult” to “literally” say what is wrong.14. This line of reasoning, which Stanghellini, Sass, and I support, has far-reaching implications for psychological theoriesof hallucinations and psychoses. It posits that visual, auditory, and other kinds of hallucinations are not similar in kind.Nonvisual hallucinations could qualify as hallucinations only if they were interpreted within a conceptual space that wasitself spatial-visual. The implications and presuppositions of this idea are an interesting topic for further study.15. Cf. Lezy (2007, 54): “Other people no longer have a life, as it were, outside the enchanted world of the person inquestion. … It is not that the patient is trying to comprehend the invisible forces driving other people, but rather that theothers no longer have a personal world of their own. Their sole preoccupation is with the patient. The invisibility of otherpeople immediately becomes a ghostly invisibility because it no longer has anything to do with real people. Other peoplehave become alien or spectral, but they are also totally focused on the patient, which makes them seem familiar. They belongwith the patient, as either pursuers or defenders.” One of Arieti’s patients reports (1950, 291) the following: “The people inKusters, Wouter. A Philosophy of Madness : The Experience of Psychotic Thinking, MIT Press, 2020. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/nyulibrary-ebooks/detail.action?docID=6388578.Created from nyulibrary-ebooks on 2022-02-11 02:13:48.Copyright   2020. MIT Press. All rights reserved.my uncle’s office become all ‘oriental businessmen’ even if they have nothing to do with the East. Whatever there is aboutthem that does not fit into this concept is blocked from the picture. In other words, they lose all their individuality.”16. Solipsism refers to a line of reasoning in which a person believes he is the only really consciously living person in thecosmos. In solipsism there is but one consciousness, one mind, one intentionally living person in an otherwise dead,mechanistic, inhuman world. I will deal with this in more detail in chapter 13.17. Masters and Houston (1966, 14) quote an LSD user: “My solipsism was accompanied by delusions of grandeur notlogically consistent with it, yet reconcilable for the reason that they had a logic of their own. … I was awed by thestereoscopic solidity of reality, the sheer substantiality of it all. Yet reality was my own thought and I was struck withwonder that one’s thoughts could suddenly become so substantive and stereoscopic. I congratulated myself upon being ableto create reality so well. I felt that others should be grateful to me for supporting their existence. I was holding them up,containing them, giving them air. I was benevolent and did not kick them.”18. Michaux writes about a similar absence of continuity under the influence of mescaline (1974, 41): “Ordinarily, I alwayshave (everyone has) a continuum which confronts the image, the idea, a continuum in whose presence these images, or theseperceptions, stream by and which, without necessarily entering into conflict with them, is tested, marked, in the fashion ofan elastic band; it is ceaselessly modified, ceaselessly shapes itself, if only minutely, but the minute change counts, it is the‘imprint.’ Band, current, resistance, or whatever, this elastic continuum, which normally underlies any alertness, was absent.It was not ‘marked’ after the passage of these images. Nothing of what should have been marked was marked. Nothing wasimprinted. … I perceived, and intensely, but the spot, once the image had passed, remained vacant.”Kusters, Wouter. A Philosophy of Madness : The Experience of Psychotic Thinking, MIT Press, 2020. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/nyulibrary-ebooks/detail.action?docID=6388578.Created from nyulibrary-ebooks on 2022-02-11 02:13:48.Copyright   2020. MIT Press. All rights reserved.2 Inlooks and OutlooksWe can understand madness more clearly by examining the dividing line between thoughtand perception. Usually we believe we know when we are thinking something—insideourselves—and when we are perceiving something—in the outside world. Mad people arejust as aware of this distinction—all too aware—except in their case, the dividing linebetween the inner and outer worlds is different. The inner world becomes public and theouter world becomes part of their own mind. Sometimes the difference between inside andoutside, cognition and perception, goes right out the window. But how is that possible? Howis that to be understood? By gaining insight into how the dividing line between inside andoutside shifts, we can learn more about madness itself. But first, a few comments abouteveryday life and how the dividing line there is drawn.2.1 Common Views of Cognition and PerceptionNormally we make a distinction between what we see and what we think. What we see arethings and what we think are thoughts. Things not only can be seen but also heard, felt,smelled, and tasted. They are perceptible. They exist in space, where other people are alsowalking around, seeing the same things and being seen themselves. You see things insofar asthey are visible. You see only the front of them and only when there’s enough light to do so.If you can’t see things very well, you can walk up to them, walk around them, look at themfrom all sides, and ask other people what they see when they look at them. You can bemistaken in the way you see things because they’re too far away or because the perspectivegives you a distorted picture. Seeing is an activity that you perform in the midst of otherpeople. Everyone sees things from their own perspective, of course, but they’re still the samethings. If two people see and describe two things entirely differently, they can’t both be right;there must be some kind of misunderstanding involved.Usually we talk about thoughts in an entirely different way than we talk about things.Thoughts are not visible, audible, or otherwise perceptible. They don’t exist in the samespace that things or people do. Only you know your own thoughts; others have no access tothem, unless you decide to make them known. Your thoughts are comprehensible to you; youknow what you’re thinking and you don’t have to go to any great length to find out what theyconsist of. You are not “subjected” to your thoughts. You’re free to think whatever you want.Kusters, Wouter. A Philosophy of Madness : The Experience of Psychotic Thinking, MIT Press, 2020. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/nyulibrary-ebooks/detail.action?docID=6388578.Created from nyulibrary-ebooks on 2022-02-11 02:13:48.Copyright   2020. MIT Press. All rights reserved.You can decide what you’re going to think about or, somehow, not think about. A thoughtthat is not thought about does not exist, unlike a thing that is not observed.Upon closer reflection, however, things are not quite so simple. The fact is that what wesee depends on the “lens” through which we see it. A person who is pregnant sees pregnantwomen and babies everywhere. Seeing is not entirely passive; you see that which you areactively attentive to, and you are attentive to whatever you are interested in. Seeing is notsomething you do with your eyes alone; your memory and your thoughts also come into play.If you enter an empty room, you may see that someone is “not there” (cf. Sartre 2003, 67,and my Sartrean analyses in chapter 12). So, apparently, you can also see an absence. Thebiologist sees many more varieties of plants than an ordinary nature lover does, and you cansee mood shifts in your beloved that no one else can see. The way things appear to us partlydepends on how we approach them and how we have thought about them in the past.Conversely, it’s hard to imagine an inner thinking process that is entirely cut off from theoutside. When you think about things or persons, you assume that they actually existsomewhere and can be observed in principle. Thoughts often have a visual quality, and“visual images” are somehow related to the observable world. Moreover, thoughts do nothave to be entirely comprehensible to the thinker himself. It can be convincingly argued thatthinking is not all that private and that you need other people in order to know what youyourself are thinking. Perhaps thoughts are only clear when they assume a shape andexpression that is observable to others. This is the opinion of many modern philosophers,such as Wittgenstein and Donald Davidson: that thoughts are only really thoughts when theyare expressed in language that can be shared. Just as perception is not concerned with theoutside world alone, so cognition is not exclusively confined to the inner world.Related to concepts such as thought and perception are concepts such as fantasizing,imagining, remembering, and so forth. By studying the “mental grammar” of such conceptsas they relate to madness, we can undertake an exploration of the mad world. This wouldinvolve working out how madmen use these concepts and thereby coming to a betterunderstanding of mad “language” and of madness itself. We must not be too hasty in ourexploration and conclude that thought and perception are “actually” the same thing and thatit’s all just an agreement that was reached in order to give it some kind of name. We must notmake the mistake of reducing philosophical problems to superficial linguistic problems andthen stop thinking. The difference between madmen and the rest of us is not just a differentuse of words like “thinking” and “seeing.” The change in language brings with it an entirelydifferent world. In the mad world, the image of modern man is called into question, andanother view emerges of what experience, interior, and exterior can be. In my exploration ofthis other world, I therefore begin with language, but I do not end there. I try to get to theheart of psychotic language; namely, the psychotic meanings that adhere to words like“thinking,” “observing,” and “seeing.”12.2 Mad Focus2.2.1 Visions and HallucinationsKusters, Wouter. A Philosophy of Madness : The Experience of Psychotic Thinking, MIT Press, 2020. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/nyulibrary-ebooks/detail.action?docID=6388578.Created from nyulibrary-ebooks on 2022-02-11 02:13:48.Copyright   2020. MIT Press. All rights reserved.Words such as “vision” and “visual” hallucination, in addition to “view” and “video,” arerelated to the Latin videre, “to see.” The term “vision” is used when someone has unusualreligious or mad experiences in which he “sees something” that cannot be perceived byothers and to which he ascribes special meaning (compare, for example, Cangas et al., 2009).This kind of private observation is called a visual hallucination in the medical-psychiatriccontext. An essential feature of ordinary perception is its “communal dimension”: what I see,hear, smell, taste, and feel must be similarly perceptible by others, in principle. But visionsand hallucinations, and what in the older German phenomenological literature is calledWahnstimmung, are characterized by this private dimension.Visions and visual hallucinations are experienced differently than, say, a spot on the eye.An organic defect, such as a visual spot or an auditory peep, is consciously perceived as adisturbance of one’s access to reality and may be correctable. A spot on the lens of myeyeball may bother me, but I do not incorporate it into my vision of reality. I do not see thespot as an actual part of my field of perception, and it has no meaning in the world I see. Iknow that other people do not have a similar spot dancing before their eyes, so I know thatthe spot is not a little creature with an existence of its own. Visions and visual hallucinations,however, do have meaning within the world as a whole. If the visionary or the hallucinatingperson were to regard his vision as a “spot” or an “impaired observation” that is not part ofhis world, the vision or visual hallucination would vanish from his world and be regarded asno more than an illusion or a physical inconvenience, meaningless for the rest of the madworld (which thereby would cease to be mad).2Visual hallucinations and visions are of a different order than a spot on your eye’s lens oran ordinary perception because they are experienced as both private and “real” at the sametime. In madness, being both private and real means that, instead of being doubted orcorrected, the hallucinations and visions are experienced as exceptional observations. If youbelieve you are seeing something real and accept that you are the only one who is seeing it,then instead of thinking you’ve seen it incorrectly, you can think you’ve seen somethingutterly unique—perhaps because you have been chosen to see something unique. Instead ofjust seeing some random, commonplace thing, you see something that no one else is seeingand that therefore must bear a special relationship to you. Why else would you be the onewho’s seeing it?Visions and hallucinations belong neither to the realm of ordinary thought nor to that ofnormal perception.3 Because of their private dimension, they seem more like thought thannormal perception. But their passive aspect, their givenness, and their entanglement with theobservable world make them seem more like normal perceptions. Those who do not acceptsuch a special status can say that visions and visual hallucinations are “actually” thoughts orfantasies that the person mistakenly believes to be perceptions. This is a commonly heardpsychiatric explanation: that the difference between thought and perception is firmlyestablished and the person doing the hallucinating is making a “category mistake” byerroneously calling a thought a perception. But someone having a vision would never call hisvision an ordinary perception; rather, he would call it a private perception and would knowKusters, Wouter. A Philosophy of Madness : The Experience of Psychotic Thinking, MIT Press, 2020. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/nyulibrary-ebooks/detail.action?docID=6388578.Created from nyulibrary-ebooks on 2022-02-11 02:13:48.Copyright   2020. MIT Press. All rights reserved.perfectly well that there are all kinds of thought aspects attached to this vision—much theway dreamers describing their dreams know perfectly well that “seeing” in a dream is notordinary “seeing” and yet is meaningful. Custance (1952, 57) says with regard to his ownmad visions, “These visions generally appear on the walls of my room, if these are shinyenough to reflect light. They are infinitely varied, and bear a close relation to the processes ofthought passing in my mind at the time.”4Visions and visual hallucinations have other things in common with thought as well. Theobserver of the vision—like the psychotic with his visual hallucination—knows that hecannot walk around the vision to view it from the back. A vision and a visual hallucinationhave no back; they are transparent to the observer, in the sense that there is nothing todiscover about the vision that is not already immediately “visible.” A vision does not occupyspace in the visible world in the same way that other things do. A vision rarely blocks theview of other things; in fact, other things don’t even relate to a vision spatially in terms of“next to,” “in front of,” or “above.”5 Sass (1992, 48) writes, “It is noteworthy that thesealterations of spatial experience in schizophrenia do not have a commensurate effect onbehavior: the patient does not walk into things, for example, as persons with distorted spatialexperience due to organic lesions are wont to do.” A person who is seeing a vision or havinga visual hallucination rarely points to it with his finger. If you ask him to show you where thehallucination is, he is more likely to describe the vision’s world of meaning than to physicallygesture at the everyday world we all have in common.6A vision is full of meaning for the “visionary” as well as being “strange,” just like thevisual hallucination. It doesn’t have to be a “pink elephant”-sort of experience, however (thehallucinatory clich ). Visions have something private and thought-like about them, but interms of content, they can resemble what normal people see. I see a tree in front of my houseright now, for instance, and that is not a vision. It isn’t a vision because I know that otherpeople are looking at (or can see) the same tree and that I can walk around it. In the madworld, however, the same tree can assume a visionary or hallucinatory quality. I would thensee the tree “as it presents itself to me, and to me alone.” I and the tree—my observation andthe observed tree—form a single whole. My observation then takes on a private aspect. Thetree becomes a “theoretical” sort of tree. It becomes an idea, a thought, or a representation tome. The fact that other people may see the tree in their own way is of less importance thanthis one unique observation of the tree, made by me.This is not usually called a vision but a Wahnstimmung, a term invented by the Germanpsychiatrist and philosopher Karl Jaspers in his Allgemeine Psychopathologie (1997).7 In thisearly stage of madness, ordinary things seem very special, although the mad person cannotsay what is so special about them. Because I am the only person who sees them as I see them,they seem made (or made in this way) especially for me.The next stage of madness might be regarded as an interpretation of this special quality.8Things don’t just happen. They exist—just as they are—for me, and “therefore” only for me,especially for me, and intended for me. Normally we look at things casually; we see them aswe have always seen them. What they are like specifically is not so interesting, since there isKusters, Wouter. A Philosophy of Madness : The Experience of Psychotic Thinking, MIT Press, 2020. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/nyulibrary-ebooks/detail.action?docID=6388578.Created from nyulibrary-ebooks on 2022-02-11 02:13:48.Copyright   2020. MIT Press. All rights reserved.a certain arbitrariness or contingency in the world. In the Wahnstimmung, however, there isno accident; accident is transformed into necessity (also see section 1.2.1). The fact thateverything is as it is, is necessarily so. If something seems to have occurred “just like that,”to have accidentally come to be there, the madman sees it as intentional. When the madmangoes one step further—and he always does; he’s mad, after all—then everything isn’t simplyspecial or meaningful; it also has a meaning that must be literally decoded by the madmanhimself. Something is being made clear to him. When the theoretical character of the treefor-me-alone becomes so strong that the tree “reveals” itself to me, entirely and exclusively, Ican say I am having a revelation, and I may interpret it in such a way as to show that there issomething else, or someone else, who is “behind” the revelation (see Intermezzo II). Oncethe Wahnstimmung has been fully interpreted (“someone” is making “something” clear to me;“by moving its leaves, the tree is trying to tell me that …”), the experience can be regarded asa vision or delusion. If I look at the whole world in this private way, everything willultimately become dreamlike, private, and hallucinatory.But isn’t the difference between the mad world and the ordinary world just a question oflanguage? Doesn’t the person having the visions “really” mean that he is having importantideas about things that are not perceptible to others? As Sass (1992, 276) notes, “Theschizophrenic patient had a vision of an intruder kneeling in her bedroom: ‘I saw the manonly abstractly with my inner eye,’ she explains. ‘I was aware of his attitude and generalbuild, but we were apart in time and on different planes of existence.’ Many hallucinationsand delusions that at first seem to involve entirely objective claims turn out, on carefulprobing, to have some kind of as-if or metaphorical quality.”Sass uses the term “metaphorical quality” and seems to suggest that statements made bymadmen are not meant to be taken literally but only metaphorically. I think the word“metaphorical” as used here is somewhat unfortunate. I would prefer to say “metonymic”;the term “to see” seems to have been shifted and expanded. Normally, when there are things“beyond perception, within the realm of thought,” you can “see them as” or “view them inthe light of,” and so forth. In madness, the use of these kinds of perceptual terms is shiftedeven further. Nevertheless, it is wrong to say that in madness there is “only” altered languageand metaphorical speech. Altered language goes hand in hand with an altered way of life.Finally, there’s a remarkable paradox involved in this condition of Wahnstimmung. On theone hand, seeing the tree as tree-for-me is of great importance: this, here, now, must beexactly as it is. Everything is meant to be this way and it all has a purpose, which brings withit a sense of necessity. On the other hand, the madman also discovers that this “connection”between himself and the tree is made and influenced by himself, which gives “how the treeappears” a subjective quality: it is more dependent on the observer’s mind. The tree as “treeas I now see it” is just one way of seeing the tree. So the mad world is not so much a worldfull of binding meaning as it is one full of playful possibility. The madman experiences thetree as “something that you might possibly see as a tree.” The hallucination, with itsinescapable inevitability, thrusts itself forward. But at the same time, the world’shallucinatory quality gives the world a subjective, indefinite air (also see section 1.2.2).Kusters, Wouter. A Philosophy of Madness : The Experience of Psychotic Thinking, MIT Press, 2020. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/nyulibrary-ebooks/detail.action?docID=6388578.Created from nyulibrary-ebooks on 2022-02-11 02:13:48.Copyright   2020. MIT Press. All rights reserved.Fragment I: Written in the StarsOne evening I walked into the city to announce my new Insight to the public. The street wasno longer the old familiar street I used to know. Everything was cast in a different light. I sawnot only the outside of things and people but also had an immediate grasp of what they werefor, what their inner purpose was. I saw the intentions of people by the way they moved, theirfacial expressions, their gestures, and the color of their clothes. I was wearing black pantsand a red coat, and it struck me that quite a few people were dressed the same way. It was asif the evening had demanded this kind of attire by tacit agreement, and it showed that,apparently, there were more people working on the new Insight. We, the red coats, discreetlyexchanged knowing nods.Chuckling on the inside, muttering on the outside, I continued my walk to the city. It wasSeptember, and the weather was brisk—a Thursday evening when the shops were all openand quite a few people were out. I had to pass through the big shopping center to get to thedowntown area where the thinkers had assembled to discuss the situation from the point ofview of the new Insight. It was very crowded. People were coming out of the train stationand the music hall, heading in every direction, and many were clearly inspired and provokedby the performance they had just seen. There was a boisterous, agitated feeling in the air.Some people clearly had the Insight; they looked up in a special way. But many others werestill ignorant—or feigned ignorance. I realized that the mood might change because of mypresence and the Plan might slide into violence. So I tried not to look too conspicuous anddecided it was better to leave the enclosed shopping center. They could tell I was differentfrom the way I looked, that I had just acquired the Insight in its pure form, and they alsoknew about my Plan: that I was going to write a book.During the previous days, I had been struck by so many brilliant ideas, received so manyinsights, discovered so many perspectives, that I had decided to knock off a new book aboutthe various kinds of psychoses. This new book would take the form of a novel and would becalled The Neon Hotel. It would be an indictment of the practice of confining people inpsychiatric institutions as well as a detailed description of the inner lives of the residents ofsuch institutions, all disguised as fiction. I was inspired by Willem Elsschot’s Villa des Roses,a sketch of the lives of several guests in a boarding house at the beginning of the twentiethcentury. I would write a similar book but set it at the beginning of the new century in amodern hotel.The Neon Hotel would complement my earlier book Alone and would expand and providea more thorough treatment of the subject matter than my first book on psychosis, PureMadness. I had already come up with a cover illustration: while Alone had six yellowrectangles, The Neon Hotel would have six red stars. What I had gone through the previousweek in the isolation cell and the mental ward would have to be added to the ideas from mybachelor’s thesis, which I had further developed and subdivided for this book of books. Itwas too bad they released me from the mental ward, by the way. I would have liked to havestayed to do fieldwork, to watch psychosis evolve from the inside, which would have givenme more material for my book. But the psychiatrist said he wanted to make sure I didn’tKusters, Wouter. A Philosophy of Madness : The Experience of Psychotic Thinking, MIT Press, 2020. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/nyulibrary-ebooks/detail.action?docID=6388578.Created from nyulibrary-ebooks on 2022-02-11 02:13:48.Copyright   2020. MIT Press. All rights reserved.profit from my illness. It seemed like such a lovely idea: a peaceful little room, a laptop, thefour most important books all stacked up, and nothing to do but record and compose.Unfortunately, the psychiatrist seemed to be the only one allowed any financial gain from mymadness. But just you wait, I thought. There had to be other ways of cogitating my head offbeyond the walls of the institution.I had to be careful, however, that my excellent Plan for the book didn’t reach the publicprematurely. It would be a great shame if someone else were to take credit for it. So I rushedout of the shopping center and walked along the tram rails toward the center of town. Iwalked and thought, looking all around me like a man possessed. There were cyclistseverywhere, pedestrians, cars, and traffic, a motley collection of micro- and macro-events tothink about. Be careful you don’t get distracted! I took in everything I saw and thought,everything that was happening around me, and converted it into my own material; I tucked itdeep inside me so that, later, it might end up in the pages of my book. I had to describeeverything that was happening in front of me, here and now. It was just like a movie set thatwas already pointing toward the future, to the book I was going write. It was as if the peoplehad escaped from the pages of my book and, if I had not been its author, I might have beenescaping from the book myself. I smiled at the deep irony of all this: Baron vonMünchhausen at quadruple proximity!I took another good look around, and in everything I saw a reflection of what I was hopingfor. According to my Insight, I could “see” more than what was so superficially visible. Notonly did I see “on” things—my glance did not stop at their surface—but now, finally, I couldsee “in” things. And as I was pondering this, I saw my own book being announced above thehotel on the edge of the square. Oh, dream of Apollo! You know those kids’ fireworks, thosesparklers they were messing around with in Volendam years ago, up there, north ofAmsterdam, where they know so much about seafood? The words “Neon Hotel” were writtenin gigantic letters in the dark with those kinds of sparklers. My Plan, leaked, and written inthe stars! But it can’t be real, can it? They can’t have been put there before I came along? If Iwere to believe what I saw, and to believe what I saw in what I saw, I really would be insane;then I’d look into the future and go back to before I made my decision! To keep fromadmitting to the possibility that I saw something that wasn’t there, I deliberately did not lookup again but kept walking without letting on. I decided to turn the heat down a bit on mythought processes, which apparently had had a Dionysian effect on my surroundings.2.2.2 Staring, Scanning, and IntuitingThe appearance of visions and visual hallucinations is stimulated by pausing andwithdrawing from the normal world of activities. I am more likely to regard the tree as a treefor-me if I stop and stand in front of it. When I walk around it, I notice it has many sides thatI cannot see at the same time. At that point, the tree becomes a real “object,” a thing in thenormal world and not simply an impression in my consciousness. You cannot walk around an“idea of treeness.” You cannot touch such an idea either, or feel its resistance. In madness, themadman no longer actively “looks at” the tree; he no longer examines it from all sides.Kusters, Wouter. A Philosophy of Madness : The Experience of Psychotic Thinking, MIT Press, 2020. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/nyulibrary-ebooks/detail.action?docID=6388578.Created from nyulibrary-ebooks on 2022-02-11 02:13:48.Copyright   2020. MIT Press. All rights reserved.Instead, he “observes” it and “stares” at it. The momentary, casual glance at the tree turnsinto staring at the void in which the tree manifests itself. This change from looking at tostaring at can be understood as the cessation of “acting.” Acting is the meaning-charged,dynamic association with the world in the world. The madman withdraws from the normalworld and no longer aligns his observation with that of other people. He no longer interactswith things; he only observes them in the staring mode.9Stanghellini (2004, 155) uses the word “scanning” in this context and compares theattitude of the madman with the inhuman “gaze” and activity (or non-activity) of a scanner(also see 13.5). Quoting a patient, he says, “If the mind is empty, it functions like a plotter ora camera,” and then comments, “These people perceive themselves and conceive ofthemselves as mechanisms for which bodily, physical, sensitive contact with reality issubstituted by disembodied noesis.” Looking, acting, and thinking are done in an ordinaryworld by people “with a body.” The lessening of acting and physical activity, and the increaseof staring and objectification, are steps on the path that leads to the mad world.10Wittgenstein sees a relationship between staring, private (“solipsistic”) Wahnstimmungand the development of philosophical problems. He writes (1958, 66), “To get clear aboutphilosophical problems, it is useful to become conscious of the apparently unimportantdetails of the particular situation in which we are inclined to make a certain metaphysicalassertion. Thus we may be tempted to say ‘Only this is really seen’ when we stare atunchanging surroundings, whereas we may not at all be tempted to say this when we lookabout us while walking.” Again, ten years later, he writes (1968, 309), “The phenomenon ofstaring is closely bound up with the whole puzzle of solipsism.” Authors such as Stanghelliniand Sass (and myself) argue that the same staring-intuiting attitude that leads to theoreticalproblems in metaphysics and philosophy also results in practical-existential problems inmadness.Mad staring and intuiting is related to Wahnstimmung and visions. Staring and intuitingare more likely to be associated with activity—at least with an active subject—whileWahnstimmung and visions are associated more with passivity. The latter two are things thathappen to you, while staring and intuiting are things that are done by you. The question is,which one occurs first in madness? Intuiting is a form of objectification, withdrawing fromthe world, after which something like “the experience of the tree-for-me” might develop. Sovisions, visual hallucinations, and Wahnstimmung could conceivably flourish in the staringintuitingattitude. But perhaps the relationship is reversed, and phenomena such as visions arefirst to occur—that is, phenomena that cannot easily be classified in the conventionalthought/observation dichotomy—after which the staring and intuiting attitude develops as areaction. A third possibility, which is most in keeping with the ideas in this book, is that thewhole division of passive versus active here is just as treacherous as the distinction madeelsewhere between bottom-up and top-down hallucinations.2.3 The World in Thoughts, Thoughts in the WorldIn this section I will use a fragment of my own devising to show how what is usually calledKusters, Wouter. A Philosophy of Madness : The Experience of Psychotic Thinking, MIT Press, 2020. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/nyulibrary-ebooks/detail.action?docID=6388578.Created from nyulibrary-ebooks on 2022-02-11 02:13:48.Copyright   2020. MIT Press. All rights reserved.the “outside world” comes to take on an “inner” or “thought-like” aspect and do it in a waythat is recognizable and understandable. Then I will show the reverse: how thoughts andinner experiences begin to resemble things from the outside world. That is, how perceptionbecomes thought and thought becomes perception. This insight provides us with an importantpoint of access to the world of madness. (Also compare Lezy 2007, 58.11)Fragment II: Internet for InsidersWith my new Insight, I finally understood how modern media really work. Media are nolonger what they used to be. Today they work by means of “thought manifestations.” Everynow and then, I receive a text message—well, I don’t “receive” it so much as it “comesthrough” or “is received” on my smart phone. These text messages make it possible for me toknow immediately what the senders are thinking. Apparently cell phones tap thoughts andreproduce them on their little illuminated screens. Conversely, my thoughts can also besiphoned off and made to appear as text on someone else’s cell phone. Although I wasassured that this was impossible, I didn’t trust such assurances and was very careful aboutwhat I thought. And with cell phones, an entire environment can be “recorded” and set downsomewhere else. So that’s the plague that is terrorizing the modern age: the internet!Everything ends up there, for all to see. If you walk around with a cell phone in your pocket,and if the phone is on, everything you’re thinking and experiencing ends up on the internet.I, too, had fallen into the internet trap. Before receiving the Insight, I had designed myown website and written a book, so that information about me found its way to the internet.At least that was the official version. Now I understood that the internet doesn’t really exist;it’s only the collective representation of all the thoughts that have ever been tapped. Anyonewho has ever been tapped has been absorbed into that matrix.In my initial ignorance, I had actively participated in my own appearance on the internet.But now I understood the threat and danger posed by this monster that we had created. It wasout of our control, just like in the Matrix movie, where they had also turned back time anddisguised it as reality. Once you end up on the internet, you’re nothing but a soulless openbook for all to read throughout eternity. The price we pay is the physical counterpart of datacirculation: red blood. Just take a look at the Vodafone logo and you know all you need toknow. Whoever spends a lot of time on the internet poisons his circulatory system. Hishumanity is undermined, his soul is sucked dry, and his life is taken over by the laws ofmoney and blood, all thanks to the image trade.Now that I was wise to this, I began to see the havoc being wreaked everywhere by theinternet. Fellow victims who had also had the Insight looked at me with pity. Theyunderstood my situation. The internet was buzzing with the images and texts that directly orindirectly pointed to me. Now I had to do penance for my earlier audacity. Everyone whosaw me could tell that I had appeared on the internet. Whenever I walked down the street, Icould hear the whispering and murmuring. In not very guarded terms, they were talkingabout me, that I had been so stupid as to go on the internet, saying, “You just don’t do thatsort of thing.” Everyone was talking about it: the internet, sending text messages, makingKusters, Wouter. A Philosophy of Madness : The Experience of Psychotic Thinking, MIT Press, 2020. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/nyulibrary-ebooks/detail.action?docID=6388578.Created from nyulibrary-ebooks on 2022-02-11 02:13:48.Copyright   2020. MIT Press. All rights reserved.phone calls. But the core of every word was hollow and hard. If I walked past, they looked atme, recognized me, and quickly averted their eyes. I turned with a mournful face and lookedat my friends who had also had the Insight, and they looked mournfully back at me. Theirfaces told me they knew what was going on: everything had been attacked and destroyed bythe internet. And to a great extent, it was my fault. Because although they had been talkingabout the internet, what they mainly were talking about was me, about me on the internet—that you could see me there, meet me, and “download” me. The only safe place is here in themental ward. There’s no internet here. But it’s alarming that the nurses seem to have accessto a computer screen. Does that mean they’ve become empty and soulless here, too?2.3.1 Imagined WorldIn this section, by way of illustration, I will look at the most extreme case in which what anormal person calls “thinking” takes on the characteristics of “perception” in madness. Howis that experienced? How is it to be understood?Mad thoughts, unlike normal thoughts, are “visible.” The perceptible outside world is“thought” or “invented” by the psychotic. That is to say, what normal people regard as ashared outside world is, in the experience of the psychotic, a manifestation of his “privatethinking.” The imagined outside world does not have the same spatial qualities as ours. Ihave already written that someone who is mad has visual hallucinations and visions of thingsthat other people do not see, and that the things others do see can take on a differentappearance to the madman (Wahnstimmung). A red car with a certain license plate driving bycan be observed by everyone, but the madman sees the car as though it is driving byespecially for him. An aura of meaningfulness fills the air: the red car appeared especially forhim, and the numbers on the license plate say something about him. The red car is only therebecause he is there as well. Without him there would be no red car—in fact, there would beno world. He “thinks” the world, and the world depends on him for its existence. The cardoes not continue on its way until the madman thinks of something that has to do with“movement.” One patient says, “In my mental illness I had been as a person, enlarged andstretched beyond all reasonable limits. I was a part of everything and the whole world,sometimes the whole universe, was in a sense a part of me.” (Sass 1992, 271).There are other people inhabiting the madman’s outside world of thought, of course, buthe does not see them “as other people”; he “thinks” and “invents” them. The appearance ofother people in the psychotic’s field of vision is like the occurrence of thoughts in the mindof the normal person: “They must be there for a reason.” That is to say, as thoughts relate tothe thinker, so psychotic observations relate to the observer, the psychotic. People who“appear” are meant to send some kind of message to the madman. They do not have anindependent existence; they have but one purpose, and it revolves around the madman. Thegestures, words, facial expressions, and movements of other people out in the street, on TV,or on the internet all point directly or symbolically to the memories and thoughts of thepsychotic.12 The whole world comes together in the madman. Instead of being “independentfellow subjects,” other people become subordinate and functional. They have the appearanceKusters, Wouter. A Philosophy of Madness : The Experience of Psychotic Thinking, MIT Press, 2020. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/nyulibrary-ebooks/detail.action?docID=6388578.Created from nyulibrary-ebooks on 2022-02-11 02:13:48.Copyright   2020. MIT Press. All rights reserved.of stereotypes or comic strip figures, and they exhibit archetypical features such as those ofthe Messenger, the Traitor, the Wise Man, and so forth.13Just when there seems to be a small opening from the mad world to the normal world, themadman will explain how the outside world is put together. But he only seems to be talkingabout a shared outside world; in fact he’s reporting on how his own universe looks, with thehelp of terms from the outside world. It is his world, the world as he thinks and perceives it.No one can refute these mad statements, because it isn’t their world. A madman will neverpoint to something in the outside world in order to indicate “something in the outside world,”but he will always use the outside world as a source of symbols and words, as part of a morespacious thought or element in his mad story. So while it may seem that the madman istalking about the shared outside world, he’s really only talking about the Wahnstimmung.Just as thoughts are normally clear and transparent for the thinker himself, so the world istransparent for the madman with regard to meaning and structure. He sees everything anddoesn’t need to go anywhere else; there are no things anywhere else that he does not knowabout. In fact, there is no “anywhere else,” since everything is a reflection of the same thing.On the one hand, this makes the mad world a vast, mysterious, baroque world withuncertainties and themes that repeat themselves in every remote corner and at every level.The colors, shapes, and movements of the “outside world” are the nuances in the madman’sown thoughts, associations, and memories. On the other hand, the mad world is a boringworld. Only the things the psychotic perceives are important. There is nothing unknown orsurprising. He already knows and understands everything, because he has made it all uphimself—at least insofar as the madness is an “imagined world.” I will discuss the other sideof this all-embracing notion—that he can be surprised by his own thoughts—in section 2.3.2.The distinction between perception and thought is like the distinction between passivityand activity. With perception, you are open to how the world presents itself to you. The worldmakes an impression on you. That is to say, the world that is as it is determines what you will(passively) perceive. Thinking, on the other hand, is something you actively do. And whenyou don’t think, there are no thoughts. With madness, it’s just the opposite. The perceivedworld becomes a thought world that is “conducted” by the subject, who sets it in motion andkeeps it going. If the madman isn’t careful, the world will lose its coherence and forwardmotion. The movements of his own frame of mind are visible in the outside world. This canlead to what are called delusions of grandeur and to ideas about telepathy and telekinesis.That is what Hans says, one of the people interviewed in De Waard (2007, 39): “That kindof thing was very strong. That I turned onto the street and a child walked out the door atexactly the same time, looking outside for a few seconds. Then I thought, oh, that must havehappened because of me. I also thought that I could help people by using a kind of hypnosis.I remember standing in the supermarket a few meters away from an old man, and trying tohelp him choose between two chocolate bars. It was even stronger with telekinesis-typeskills. I felt connected to everything. I used to play soccer every now and then. Sometimes itwas windy and the ball would roll away, and I would focus my thoughts and think: stoprolling right now. One time I was sitting at the kitchen table, trying to make a fork stand onKusters, Wouter. A Philosophy of Madness : The Experience of Psychotic Thinking, MIT Press, 2020. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/nyulibrary-ebooks/detail.action?docID=6388578.Created from nyulibrary-ebooks on 2022-02-11 02:13:48.Copyright   2020. MIT Press. All rights reserved.end without touching it. My father saw it and me asked me, what are you doing? I’m tryingto make that fork stand on end.”The madman actively thinks and manages the world the way normal people activelyconduct their thoughts. Yet the madman is aware that a lot of things are escaping from hispower of thought and that the world is not entirely under his control. In order to maintaintotal control, he must think the right thoughts and make sure the right things happen.Normally we distinguish the observed world from the inner world, and within that innerworld we distinguish true thoughts, memories, and representations from false thoughts,imaginings, and fantasies. With madness, however, “perception” is packed with all kinds ofthoughts, imaginings, and fantasies. Everything happens in the same way: a fantasy makes asmuch of an impression as an observation or a thought. The world changes from reality topossibility; reality becomes less real and takes on a provisional, temporary, and reversiblequality (also see section 1.2.2). The psychotic world is less “serious” and resembles a thoughtgame—or a computer game.The psychotic believes that the world is not a given, but that it exists owing to rules thathe imposes and can change. There is no “real world” against which other possible worlds canbe compared. A thought of the “it may be that …” genre is of the same value in the madworld as “it is commonly known that …” The inner dialogue, the mental struggle, and thesolipsistic game are all played out on the stage of perception. The perceived world is borneby the mad “inner” world, and everything boils down to “it depends on how you look at it.”The world takes on the personal imprint of madness and the madman. Lezy (2007, 66) says,“Someone who perceives himself as the center of the world may have a feeling of divineomnipotence. This often happens in psychotic patients, especially in their ecstatic moments.They have the experience that they themselves are the source of everything that happens. Thecircle of meanings around them seems like their own creation.”As a result, the madman lives in a lonely, solipsistic world.14 His mind serves as the basisfor whatever he perceives. At the same time, he is not lonely, because a continuous innerdialogue is taking place among several “voices.” There are many forces and streams of ideaspopulating his inner world, which gives it more of the features of an outside world.2.3.2 Thinking as ThingsWhile the perceived world takes on a “theoretical” or “imagined” look, mad thoughts become“realer” and appear more like objects. Usually, for the unmad person, thoughts have no tasteat all, but with madness thoughts become more sensual; they might appear in color, forinstance. Thoughts take place in a thinking area; they are large or small, sharp, round, soft, orhard. They also move; they take leaps and leave lines and tracks. Some thoughts feel heavy,while others feel very light. Thoughts become more physical; they can drag you along, andyou can feel them racing through your body. You can even get them to flow out of your headand through your hands or the top of your skull.15For the madman, the things that are “thought” this way are less part of himself than theyare for normal people. In madness, thoughts are more like inspirations and bright ideas thatKusters, Wouter. A Philosophy of Madness : The Experience of Psychotic Thinking, MIT Press, 2020. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/nyulibrary-ebooks/detail.action?docID=6388578.Created from nyulibrary-ebooks on 2022-02-11 02:13:48.Copyright   2020. MIT Press. All rights reserved.come from the outside; they are experienced as strange, and the madman feels noresponsibility for them. Instead he has the feeling that thoughts are presenting themselves tohim rather than that he is thinking them himself.16 He can be surprised by “thoughts.” We areusually surprised by thoughts that we read about in a text, but the madman is surprised bythoughts that he “reads,” or experiences, in his own mind. Strangely enough, the thoughts ofa madman are therefore quite real in the sense that they are perceptible, but at the same timethey are “contingent” in the sense that they could just as well have been otherwise, so that nospecial value need be attached to them. Often these thoughts are “seen” and talked about interms of (physical) images or representations. Sechehaye’s Renee (1970, 39) writes, “But Icould find no rest, for horrible images assailed me, so vivid that I experienced actual physicalsensation. I cannot say that I really saw images; they did not represent anything. Rather I feltthem. It seemed that my mouth was full of birds which I crunched between my teeth, andtheir feathers, their blood and broken bones were choking me.”In madness, thoughts are often experienced as being open to the public, just as theperceived world normally is. Mad thoughts are there for all the world to see, and the madmanis not surprised that his thoughts are discussed in newspapers and other media. When hethinks something, he is surrounded by the commentary of the voices of people on the street,the headlines and texts in newspapers, the images on television, and his own associations andideas.Farr (1982, 2) writes, “Another disturbing phenomenon was that sometimes my thoughtswere audibly loud and I began to think that other people could hear what I was thinking. Iused to think that I could hear my thought waves being broadcast over speakers. … I hadabsolutely no sense of privacy. My innermost thoughts were broadcast to the world.” Inchapter 16 I will discuss many of the cases that the German psychiatrist Klaus Conradexamines in Die beginnende Schizophrenie: Versuch einer Gestaltanalyse des Wahns.Writing about one of his patients, he says (1958, 11), “He had already noted that he wasunder hypnosis because his thoughts were being passed around. People wanted to draweverything out of him. Everyone was able to read his mind. Whenever he thought ofsomething, other people made it clear to him that they knew what he was thinking. … If hehad some unusual thought, people kept a close eye on him or coughed conspicuously, so thathe always had to make sure all his thoughts were innocent. This made him very tired andtense.”It isn’t so much that his thoughts “don’t make sense” or that a madman sees things thataren’t there, but that the relationship between thinking and perception has changed. Thismakes itself felt in the madman’s language and other areas of expression. I will be comingback repeatedly to such shifting and blurring of borders: between the present and the past,between here and there, and between fact and fiction. The problem this poses for describingand understanding is that the place and significance of the human being and hisconsciousness change and disappear. Madness and modern philosophy share thischaracteristic; they no longer know from which basis statements can be made. There is nolonger an irrefutable core or an absolute starting point; there is no identity, no person. At theKusters, Wouter. A Philosophy of Madness : The Experience of Psychotic Thinking, MIT Press, 2020. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/nyulibrary-ebooks/detail.action?docID=6388578.Created from nyulibrary-ebooks on 2022-02-11 02:13:48.Copyright   2020. MIT Press. All rights reserved.very most, there’s a void waiting to be filled in and interpreted—and at the same time to befeared and fled from.Notes1. Sass (1992, 214) writes about this mad “mental grammar”: “Normally, one does have the sense of living one’sperceptions, thoughts and actions as if from within, with an implicit or semi-conscious sense of intention and control; onegenerally feels that one’s own consciousness belongs to oneself, and that unless one communicates the inner life throughword or gesture, it will remain private. These presuppositions are, in fact, so deeply embedded in our general outlook andmode of existence that to state them has the ring of tautology—as if any alternative were simply impossible to conceive. Butstrangely enough, with the development of a schizophrenic psychosis these very assumptions can be no longer be reliedupon—and, in the wake of their collapse, the nearly unimaginable holds sway. A schizophrenic person may, for example,actually lose the sense of initiating his own actions … such a person may lose the feeling that the thoughts in his own mindreally belong to him, and may conclude that what he experiences is actually the consciousness of someone else … aschizophrenic may even have the feeling that his own thoughts are being extracted from his head in some weird manner.”2. A distinction is made in the literature between “bottom-up” and “top-down” hallucinations (compare, for example, Bayne& Pacherie 2004, Campbell 2001, Maher 1999 and the discussion in Thornton 2007). Bottom-up hallucinations occur whenthe perceptual process itself is “incorrect” or “disturbed,” leading to the wrong conclusions; top-down hallucinations occurwhen thought processes are disturbed, which results in incorrectly “seeing something as.” The essence of hallucinations ismissing from this discussion, which attempts to reduce the common, meaning-laden quality of perception to a quasiobjectivebiological fact. In such discussions, a spot on the eye’s lens cannot be distinguished from a hallucination, andlogical errors cannot be distinguished from delusions.3. In the same way that “normal people” know whether they’re hearing or seeing something, people who have visions orhallucinations usually know how to distinguish between visions and “real” observations (Jannemiek Tukker in a personalremark). This is not always the case, however. One patient quoted in Sass (1992, 282) says, “I don’t know when I talk toyou, whether I am having an hallucination, or a fantasy about a memory, or a memory about a fantasy.” “Normal people” arealso sometimes uncertain as to whether they are remembering something or fantasizing it, or whether they saw something,just thought they saw it, or knew about it only through hearsay.4. We will be coming across many more passages from Custance’s detailed autobiography in this work.5. This does not apply to all visual hallucinations, by the way. There is enormous variety among hallucinations, and there isa large, vague, gray area between neurological disorders and psychopathological hallucinations (cf. Sacks 2012). What I amdescribing is characteristic of hallucinations—especially visual ones—in the context of psychoses, manias, mysticalexperiences, and religious experiences.6. In a personal observation, Jannemiek Tukker notes that she can describe her visions afterward as linked to a particularlocation in the normal, three-dimensional world: “I can always point to the place where the vision occurred and manifesteditself, thereby projecting the vision into space. Jesus, for example, was hanging in front of the curtains, just below theceiling. Another example: a bird flew through the window and into my belly. There it sat on its eggs, and I really saw thebird in my belly.” The question, however, is whether the hallucination occupied a place within the intersubjective spacewhile she was hallucinating, or whether she experienced it as a private occurrence. Note that Tukker does say, “Therebyprojecting the vision into space.”7. Sass (1992, 44) writes, “The Wahnstimmung is a strange and enigmatic atmosphere, a mood that infuses everything yeteludes description almost completely … everything is totally and uncannily transformed … the feeling of reality is eitherheightened, pulsing with a mysterious, unnameable force, or else oddly diminished or undermined—or, paradoxically, thingsmay seem both unreal and extra-real at the same time. … Patients in these moments may have a feeling of crystal-clearsight, of profound penetration into the essence of things, yet typically, there is no real, clear content to communicate.”Jaspers cites the following example (quoted in Sass 1992, 53): “A patient noticed the waiter in the coffee-house; he skippedpast him so quickly and uncannily. He noticed odd behavior in an acquaintance which made him feel strange; everything inthe street was so different, something was bound to be happening. A passer-by gave such a penetrating glance, a kind ofmechanical dog made of rubber.”Kusters, Wouter. A Philosophy of Madness : The Experience of Psychotic Thinking, MIT Press, 2020. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/nyulibrary-ebooks/detail.action?docID=6388578.Created from nyulibrary-ebooks on 2022-02-11 02:13:48.Copyright   2020. MIT Press. All rights reserved.8. Sass (1992, 60) says, “The experience of the Apophany is shot through with a profound and almost unbearable tension insome cases combined with exaltation. In this state of pulsing significance, the very ineffability, uncanniness and precision ofeverything seems nearly intolerable, as if the human need for meaning and coherence were being titillated only to befrustrated on the brink of its fulfillment.”9. Sass (1994, 35) provides a striking description of this process: “By interacting with the world—for example, by pickingup an object—one is obliged to recognize the world’s otherness. The very weight of the object and the resistance it offers tothe hand testify to its existence as something independent of will or consciousness. … By contrast, in a passive state theworld may look rather different. The more one stares at things, the more they may seem to have a coefficient of subjectivity;the more they may come to seem ‘things seen.’ When staring fixedly ahead, the field of consciousness as such can come intoprominence; then, it is as if the lens of awareness were clouding over and the world beyond were taking on the diaphanousquality of a dream. At this point a person can be said to experience experience rather than the world, to have the impressionof seeing not, say, an actual and physical stove but a ‘visual stove,’ the stove-as-seen-by-me.”10. In psychiatry, immobility or catatonia is understood as a symptom of schizophrenia. This does not mean that everymadman is immobile. Even when active, you can have a way of looking that can be characterized more as staring thanlooking.11. Lezy (2007, 58) gives us a striking description of the mad world: “When it comes to psychosis, it is probably notpossible to make a clear distinction between perception and cognition. This distinction is based on the psychology of thenormal. We have a tendency to think that psychosis looks like normal functioning in principle but that it involves‘nonsensical discourse.’ We pay too little attention to the fact that the entire structure of the experience has changed. Thismeans that in psychosis, both perception and thought can be structured differently. Normal functioning is based on a cleardistinction between the intimate inner world and the public outer world. In psychosis, this clear distinction can no longer besustained: observations are all meaning and intention, while thoughts are often more perceived than thought. We can also saythat the outer world becomes more personal, while the inner world becomes more impersonal. In psychosis, what wenormally experience as personal is often under alien rule.”12. What I actually should say here is that the gestures, words, facial expressions, and movements of other people out in thestreet, on TV, or on the internet are the memories and thoughts of the psychotic.13. There is a parallel between madness and experiencing things in a mythical way. In both cases the images andimpressions of the world take on the quality of “thought,” while the inner world acquires a more substantial or materialdimension. Ernst Cassirer (1925, 71) has this to say about the mythical experience: “Die mythische Phantasie dringt aufBelebung und Beseelung, auf durchg ngige ‘Spiritualisierung’ des All; aber die mythische Denkform, die alle Qualit tenund T tigkeiten, alle Zust nde und Beziehungen an ein festes Substrat bindet, führt immer wieder zum entgegengesetztenExtrem: zu einer Art Materialisierung geistiger Inhalte zurück.” (Also see section 2.3 and chapter 15.)14. Similar experiences are reported by LSD users. For a detailed drugs/psychosis comparison, see chapter 10, cf. note 17from chapter 1.15. This is not madness, per se. In normal life, too, thoughts are interwoven with mimicry and physical expression. Perhapsit is typical of modernity to view human thought as being nonphysical, but in actual practice most thoughts can be read onpeople’s faces. Even the association of thoughts with colors occurs in the normal world (synesthesia). Nonetheless, thephysicality and concreteness of thought does go much further in madness. Not only can the emotional aspects of thoughts beexperienced physically but so can “geographic” aspects; for example, a thought of the east can be experienced on the rightside of the head.16. This can lead to the experience of thought implantation, brain sapping, mind reading, and so on.Kusters, Wouter. A Philosophy of Madness : The Experience of Psychotic Thinking, MIT Press, 2020. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/nyulibrary-ebooks/detail.action?docID=6388578.Created from nyulibrary-ebooks on 2022-02-11 02:13:48.Copyright   2020. MIT Press. All rights reserved.3 Outside TimeWe Are Not HereWe are not here, we lie within, we seeahead in time gone by; but this can’t bethis is today, a wedge, the simplest partof naught, we’ve dispossessed ourselves to thingsthe same light breaks inside and out, mirrorthat cannot choose, twin brothers, me or mewe see what was although we are, by seeingwhat is blindness, nonsense, it can’t bedoes not exist, it lies, wiped out in whiteall is nothing than blacker, whiter in fact——Gerrit Kouwenaar, Een geur van verbrande veren (A Smell of Burnt Feathers, 1991)Another indicator of a psychosis, besides hallucinations and delusions, is “disorientation” intime and space. A quick test for diagnosing psychosis is to ask such questions as Where doyou think we are? What day is it today? Where were you last week? Being unable to answersuch questions, or answering them incorrectly, can indicate a psychosis-related disorder. Butwhat does “disorientation” in time and space mean? What kind of world is it in whichsomeone doesn’t understand time? That is the question I will be exploring here.Understanding how time changes in madness will give us deeper insight into the mad world.The time theme is the focus of this chapter, but I will return to it at several points later in thebook as well. Time marches on, and the last word is yet to be spoken.We can more easily understand the mad experience of time by learning what it means tounderstand time in the normal world. But no sooner do we begin thinking about time thanthings quickly start getting more complicated. The more we ponder the subject of time, themore we find ourselves saddled with exactly the kinds of problems we’re trying to solve. Oneof the first philosophers to concern himself with time, Augustine, put it this way: “What,then, is time? As long as no one asks me, I know. As soon as I wish to explain it to him whoasks, I know not.” For the philosopher, the question of time is usually no more than atheoretical problem that will have no impact on his daily existence. For while he reflects onKusters, Wouter. A Philosophy of Madness : The Experience of Psychotic Thinking, MIT Press, 2020. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/nyulibrary-ebooks/detail.action?docID=6388578.Created from nyulibrary-ebooks on 2022-02-11 02:13:48.Copyright   2020. MIT Press. All rights reserved.the direction or the reality of time and is amazed by it, he still keeps using the calendar andjotting down appointments in his datebook. For the madman, however, these kinds ofquestions about time are actual life problems; he no longer knows “when he is” or which waytime is going. He no longer understands the clock or the calendar.So if we want to find out exactly what time is, the philosopher is not the one to turn to.But we can consult the philosopher to see how reflecting on time can lead to confusion. Thatis what I will be doing in this chapter. I will follow the philosophical argumentation withregard to time, expose the paradoxes, and show how this kind of reflection, if taken seriously,can lead to obsessive brooding and, finally, to mad time—and the mad world (also seechapter 13).To that end, I will begin by explaining the two irreconcilable views of time: the externalobjective-static view and the internal-subjective-dynamic view. According to the first view,the concept of time refers to the temporal relations between events in nature or in the world,with the awareness of time being a derivative of these relations. The second view is exactlythe opposite. In this view, time is an aspect of inner experience and awareness, with thetemporal order of the world being a projection derived from that experience and awareness.The philosopher reflects on these two views and tries to find arguments to support one ofthem or even to reconcile both of them. In daily life, however, the paradoxes and difficultiesbrought to light by the philosophy of time are masked by our customs, our language, and ourstories. Most people are oblivious to the unfathomable miracle of time, and the normalnonphilosophical individual rarely suffers from “temporal confusion” with regard to what“real time” is. Only the madman rubs up against the edges of the experience of time andventures beyond them. I will describe this further in the second half of the chapter, followinga fragment about my own strange experiences of time.3.1 The Fabric of Everyday Time3.1.1 Fixed Time: AristotleAccording to the static view, time exists outside our consciousness as part of reality. Time isthe background or the grid on which events occupy a temporal position. This was the opinionof thinkers such as Newton and Leibniz, as well as that of modern physics and analyticphilosophers such as Smart (1963). The French philosopher Paul Ricoeur calls this notion oftime cosmological time or universal time. It is an understanding of time that was thoroughlyworked out by Aristotle.Time, says Aristotle in book 4 of the Physics, has something to do with the movement ofan object in space—indeed, without movement, there is no time. Time is a feature ofmovement, in general, since time is everywhere, irrespective of the speed—let alone thedirection—of a moving object. When movement occurs, you can say that a moving thinggoes from one place to another, that there is an “earlier” place and a “later” place. Althoughtime is different from space as an aspect of movement, you can also say that there is an“earlier” and a “later” with regard to time. Once we have determined an earlier (a “before”)and a later (an “after”), and we have therefore observed two different moments of movement,Kusters, Wouter. A Philosophy of Madness : The Experience of Psychotic Thinking, MIT Press, 2020. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/nyulibrary-ebooks/detail.action?docID=6388578.Created from nyulibrary-ebooks on 2022-02-11 02:13:48.Copyright   2020. MIT Press. All rights reserved.then what is between those two moments is a segment of measured time. When time isdescribed like this, it is stretched out, since it is “bounded” by two moments. Aristotledefines and describes time as follows:For time is just this: number of motion in respect of “before” and “after.” Hence time is not movement, but only movementin so far as it admits of enumeration. An indication of this: we discriminate the more or the less by number, but more or lessmovement by time. Time then is a kind of number. (Number, we must note, is used in two ways—both of what is counted orthe countable and also of that with which we count. Time, then, is what is counted, not that with which we count: these aredifferent kinds of thing.) Just as motion is a perpetual succession, so also is time.The number of the movement must not be understood as an abstract number that is theequivalent of the time. The number is more like what a water mill or water clock produces,counting one with every revolution. By coupling time to counting, we form the prelude to adiscussion of “absolute time” and “relative time.” Visually speaking, all movements andevents can be represented as the activation of a time mill (in other words, a clock) that“creates” or “indicates” a segment of time with each revolution. When the time mill creates aseries of numbers, time is then dependent on the objects and their movement, and this isrelative time (Leibniz). When the increasing numbers refer to something like “time,” we aretalking about absolute time (Newton), within which movement takes place but in which timeis not dependent on that movement.According to Aristotle, time is a feature of the outside world, of the physis, or nature. Inlater physics, this is the dominant view. There are also variations of this view: in the theory ofrelativity, the “speed” of time is related to space, mass, and gravity. In even more modernphysics, there is talk of particles that “go back” in time. Despite the differences, the basicidea is always the same: time is something that can be measured, divided, and examined aspart of nature beyond our conscious awareness. (In section 5.4, I will continue myexploration of the relationship between this “earthly” fixed time and madness.)In this static understanding of time, time is a motionless background against which eventsare placed that can relate to each other in three different ways: “earlier than,” “later than,”and “at the same time as.”1 These are objective “temporal” relations between events that takeplace in the world. These relations have nothing to do with “us,” with the observer or themind. It’s just that some events are placed before or after other events in time, and that is allthat can be said about time. The fact that it is the mind or the observer who must fix andcompare the two moments of the movement is not dealt with by Aristotle and thetheoreticians of static time (though compare Ricoeur in his Time and Narrative).2 Even ifhumans did not exist, all events would still be connected to each other absolutely by meansof these temporal relations. This view of time is good for organizing and explaining eventsthat are governed by the laws of nature, which is why it is so suitable to scientific reflectionson the world.Yet this is only one approach to time. Strict supporters of this view would find themselves ina dead world, one without purpose, direction, meaning, or orientation. Indeed, for orientationyou need a viewpoint (or a point of orientation). To orient yourself in time, you must occupyKusters, Wouter. A Philosophy of Madness : The Experience of Psychotic Thinking, MIT Press, 2020. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/nyulibrary-ebooks/detail.action?docID=6388578.Created from nyulibrary-ebooks on 2022-02-11 02:13:48.Copyright   2020. MIT Press. All rights reserved.a position in time, you must anchor yourself in a here-and-now perspective. You need a “timeof the soul,” as Ricoeur calls it, from which you can set a goal and see where you’re going.The static view of time has no now, no present. Ricoeur compares Aristotle’s static time withAugustine’s dynamic time and says (1988, 18), “What prevents it [i.e., deriving the time ofthe soul from the time of the world] is quite simply the conceptually unbridgeable gapbetween the notion of the ‘instant’ in Aristotle’s sense and that of the ‘present’ as it isunderstood by Augustine.”In other words, in the static view there are many “measurable moments,” but there is noroom for “this” moment, the anchor of the present. The static view is limited to events thatare connected to each other by means of temporal relations. There is no present that we canexperience, in which we are, and from which we could differentiate between future, present,and past. With the static view, time is looked at but not lived in. In the static view, timedoesn’t move, nor is there any real difference between the future and the past tense. Time isan immobile timeline or time path, and it’s impossible to imagine any car ever riding on it.Indeed, where on the timeline should the car be placed? At each moment the car issomewhere else, and in that sense you cannot say anything about the car without introducinga “metatime,” and thereby a vicious time circle. Yet such a “car” is necessary; how else cantwo moments “ever” be grasped, with a period in between, if they are not “gathered together”in the car? Time requires an observer who is able to grasp two nonsimultaneous “nows”simultaneously.3.1.2 Moving Time: Husserl IThe dynamic or subjective view of time speaks of experienced time, lived time, the time ofthe soul, inner time, and so forth. Dynamic time is based on the “here and now,” and “theexperience of” and “in the current moment.” In this view, the only time that really exists isthe present. We are living today, at this hour and in this minute and second. Everything weassert about other times pertains to mere models that are grounded in our current awareness.We live NOW, and it is within this present moment that we can have memories of a vaguepast and expectations of an uncertain future. In this view, past, present, and future each has adifferent status. The present is not a static fact or “given moment” but a fluid, dynamicreality. It’s like a ship sailing on the river of events. The events flow toward us from a notyet-existing, undetermined future, we meet them in a flash of actual presence, and weimmediately leave them behind us in the bygone, no-longer-existing, and unchanging past.In this vision, there is an essential difference between past and future that is consistentwith our normal experience. We are in the present, in the here and now. In fact, we are“always” here and now. When we think about it, there is really nothing else beyond thehorizon of the pure being-in-the-present. Someday we’ll be in the future, but we’ll neveragain be in the past. We once were in the past, but we have yet to be in the future. If wereflect on these last statements, we realize that, ultimately, the dynamic view is equallyuntenable: the difference between past and future can only be explained in terms of words(and verbal conjugations) that already presume a familiarity with that difference. HusserlKusters, Wouter. A Philosophy of Madness : The Experience of Psychotic Thinking, MIT Press, 2020. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/nyulibrary-ebooks/detail.action?docID=6388578.Created from nyulibrary-ebooks on 2022-02-11 02:13:48.Copyright   2020. MIT Press. All rights reserved.(1991) tried to base his views of time on this dynamic experience of time, which results in amodel that is insightful for both ordinary and mad time experiences.For Husserl, the present is a continuum with an internal structure. Perception in thispresent is not like a point on a timeline; rather, it encompasses or “reaches out to” a temporalfield filled with phantasms and sensations. Sensations are experiences that happen right now,while phantasms refer to the immediate past and future within this temporal field of thepresent. According to Husserl, the present always contains a residue of the “fresh” past andan expectation of the immediate future. The length of this fresh past varies. If youconcentrate on a single note in a melody, you “forget” the melody; if you concentrate on themelody, then the larger whole of, say, the symphony is not in the temporal field; and so forth.For Husserl (1991, 47), a point-like present is an ideal limit that can never be completelyattained.So the temporal field of the present consists of a portion of primary memory, or“retention,” and primary expectation, or “protention,” which are separated by an idealabstraction—“perception” or “impression.” An important aspect of Husserl’s model is thattime-consciousness demands that retention, impression, and protention form a coherentwhole, a continuum of time. Time-consciousness can also transform unreal and mutuallyincoherent phantasms and sensations into a continuum of time that is called “real.”Husserl speaks of something he calls secondary memory as well. This, too, is a form offantasy consciousness, but it does not have to be integrated into a coherent present in atemporal field; rather, it is seen as “absent presence,” by which fewer demands are placed oncoherence with the present. Indeed, here there is no need for a flowing transition between amemory and an observation. Whether a secondary memory is an imagined fantasy or areference to something that “really” happened is a subject for reflection and discussion. Thisdifference between the given coherent presence of the temporal field and the reflectablerepresentation of the secondary memory will later be called the difference between theprereflective and the reflective consciousness by the French philosopher Maurice Merleau-Ponty and other phenomenologists and psychologists.What “counts” as memory, or even as fantasy, about a distant past is subject to reflectionand therefore to outside influences. But what counts as a “coherent temporal field” precedesreflection and representation. Husserl scholar Dan Zahavi (2002, 83) writes, “Whereas theso-called retentional modification [primary memory, WK] is a passive process which takesplace without our active contribution, a recollection [secondary memory] is an act which wecan initiate ourselves.” So a disturbed—or inappropriate—incoherent experience of thetemporal field, the present, would seem to have had its origin in the physical and to havewithdrawn from our influence. An “incorrect” representation of the distant past, however, hasa stronger mental, linguistic, representative dimension, so it can be influenced by the will.What makes the matter all the more complex is that the subjective experience of thatthree-part present also has its own temporal character, according to Husserl. It concerns atemporal field, but it is also “in time.” The subjective experience of time therefore rests in, oris made possible by, an “absolute time-consciousness,” or a stream. This stream itself is notKusters, Wouter. A Philosophy of Madness : The Experience of Psychotic Thinking, MIT Press, 2020. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/nyulibrary-ebooks/detail.action?docID=6388578.Created from nyulibrary-ebooks on 2022-02-11 02:13:48.Copyright   2020. MIT Press. All rights reserved.changeable, but it is assumed because of the subjective experience of time. It is the subjectiveexperience of time without anything being experienced; it is the possibility of that experienceitself. For Husserl, the stream is that within which the one doing the experiencing and theexperience itself are still one. There is little that can be said about this one; somethingremains that is insoluble and changeable, something that flows.3 For Husserl, the basis oftime is not solid ground, not a quantifiable expanse, but a flowing. The big problem with thisview is that the more deeply we analyze or delve into the experience and consciousness ofand in the present, the more concepts we must borrow from the static view of time. Termssuch as “flowing,” “springing from,” and “source” are all concepts and metaphors borrowedfrom the “objective outside world.”4The order of objective static time, according to Husserl, can be traced to the coherence inthe subjectively determined temporal fields. That is to say, the static view is secondary to thedynamic view. Both a remembered temporal field (the memory of a melody heard yesterday)and a present temporal field (a melody being heard now) must be coherent. By means of thiscoherence or continuity requirement, Husserl hopes to substantiate the “historical a priori.” Inmaking this attempt, however, he seems to be smuggling in even more elements fromobjective, static time. The five principles of historical a priori, which I will briefly criticizehere, are the following, according to Husserl (1991, 10):1) The fixed temporal order is a two-dimensional infinite series.Whenever I have two mutually exclusive theories about a period of time, this a prioriprinciple tells me I should regard one of them as memory and the other as “fantasy.” Thisdoes not follow from the coherence or continuity requirement. The existence of two or moretimelines that converge in the present is also possible in principle. It all depends on exactlyhow a continuum or coherency is defined.2) Two different times can never be simultaneous.Whether this is so depends on the status of the consciousness or the subject. It’s true thatwhen there is only one subject, there can be only one temporal field. But when the subject isa real living subject in the midst of other subjects, “multiple times” are possible—at leastthey aren’t logically excluded. It is conceivable that each subject constitutes his own time andthat there is no common, objective time. Each has his own “stream.”3) Their relation [of these two times] is a non-reciprocal one.4) Transitivity obtains.5) To every time an earlier time and a later time belong.Principles 3 through 5 all have to do with the difference between protention and retention,and they insist that a fantasy or recollection in the present can be represented only in terms ofthe same linear structure as that of primary temporal subjectivity. It is unclear to me whyHusserl uses the term “a priori laws” and not, for example, “strong common-senseintuitions.”Husserl’s theory runs into major problems, as all subjective time theories ultimately do:Kusters, Wouter. A Philosophy of Madness : The Experience of Psychotic Thinking, MIT Press, 2020. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/nyulibrary-ebooks/detail.action?docID=6388578.Created from nyulibrary-ebooks on 2022-02-11 02:13:48.Copyright   2020. MIT Press. All rights reserved.when we make a distinction between past and future, what exactly is being distinguished?How can this distinction be made without already assuming it? Are we not bound to assumean independently given time path (static time), part of which is located before us and partafter us? According to Husserl’s a priori laws, this path can consist of neither a road with sideroads branching off of it nor a circular road. The limited view from the car on the road,however, makes this incomprehensible. The notion of coherence or continuum cannot befound in the car either. A purely dynamic view, without elements from the static view, isimpossible.Husserl’s study of the sources of time can provoke even more astonishment or perplexitywith regard to time, for Husserl himself or for the reader of his work.5 In 8.3, I will show youhow pondering the writings of Husserl can send you—and me, too, as a reader of Husserl—into a spiral of astonishment and a whirlpool of madness.3.1.3 Human Time: RicoeurI have now discussed the two philosophical views and argued that, while they can’t livetogether, neither can they live apart.6 Lurking behind time is a paradox that cannot beresolved but can at least be made livable. My theory of mad time is that psychotics deal withthis paradox differently than “normal people” do. The latter articulate, sublimate, or cover theparadox by means of shared stories, symbolic forms, or habits that together can be regardedas a third form of time: “human time.”7“Human time” is made possible by the narrative character of language and the stories inlanguage that people share with each other. Such stories, such “narratives,” have to do withthe history of the world, with one’s own family history, or with one’s personal past, and theyprovide hints as to what a successful life is, what goals and actions are worth emulating, andhow to think, feel, and speak in a meaningful way. They allow for a shared vision of theworld and for the existence of consciously shared time.It is in stories that the mysterious status of the “past” as “history” is grasped andexplained, and a distinction is made between fiction in imaginary time and histories thatreally happened and occupy a place on the calendar. According to Ricoeur, the calendar isone of the most important means by which “human time” makes the connection betweeninner and outer (dynamic and static) time. Thanks to the calendar, my experience of time islinked to that of my contemporaries and is related to the commonly accepted sequence ofhistory. Ricoeur (1988, 105) has this to say about the human imposition of calendar time:“The time of the calendar is the first bridge constructed by historical practice between livedtime and universal time [dynamic and static time, WK]. It is a creation that does not stemexclusively from either of these perspectives on time. Even though it may participate in oneor the other of them, its institution constitutes the invention of a third form of time.” Thanksto the calendar, there is a historical time, a real past, distinct from fictional, unreal time andfantasy. Preceding this division into fact and fiction is “mythic time,” says Ricoeur, whichplays a role in the collapse of the distinction between fact and fiction in madness (see chapter15).Kusters, Wouter. A Philosophy of Madness : The Experience of Psychotic Thinking, MIT Press, 2020. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/nyulibrary-ebooks/detail.action?docID=6388578.Created from nyulibrary-ebooks on 2022-02-11 02:13:48.Copyright   2020. MIT Press. All rights reserved.In addition to consciously told stories, there are also habits and commonly acceptedpractices that are essential to the way humans (not mad ones) deal with time. Thanks tohabits, the contrast between static and dynamic time is not so much articulated as it is madelivable. Because of habits, whenever we go shopping, for example, we do it according to afixed pattern, a fixed rhythm, and for a certain length of time. We trust in a knowledge that ishalf-conscious and half-automatic, and as a result we can manage quite well in life. We don’thave to analyze the operation of the clock or wonder whether we can be sure that “Mondayreally does follow Sunday” every time we go out shopping. A great deal of what happens intime is automatic, according to common sense or habit. The normal human way of relating totime implies a trust in automatically accepting things that are not “true” or for which there isno logical proof. Although every such accepted thing can, in itself, be doubted, together theyconstitute the fabric of our social and personal lives, which may be made more explicit innarratives. They are the shared background that makes it possible to live in time withoutslipping into madness. This background is not so much a collection of statements ofknowledge as it is a practice of habits, modes of behavior, and attitudes that together form thesubstructure, or the framework itself, within which disagreement and knowledge about timecan be understood.Fragment III: Bar TimeAfter having seen “Neon Hotel” written in the sky, I take a brief pause from the turbulentevents on the street. I walk into a familiar bar, but because of my Insight, I see it withcompletely different eyes. It’s a students’ bar, and only now do I really understand what thatmeans. The student phase is a difficult period in a person’s life. Students themselves don’t yethave the Insight, but they do have the opportunity to lose their way. So they have to beclosely guided by those who have the Insight already. In order to look after the students ofthe City, an extensive and low-key network of people with Insight has been set up. Thebarkeeper is one of them, and a number of somewhat older customers have stationedthemselves in the bar to keep an eye on the students. They’re especially concerned aboutdisorderly conduct. The City is a place of peace, where people have to be guarded againstany agitation that might give rise to turbulence, conflict, and fighting. Recently there havebeen many reports in the media of war, violence, and death, and of the virus of hatred, whichis a constant threat to the City. As soon as disturbances are detected, they must be neutralizedwithout delay. We—people with Insight—do that by intervening from a level that is higherthan the parameters of the general mood. The young students in the bar chatter innocentlyabout this and that, and we elders step in if things threaten to get out of hand. We sit there atthe bar, unobtrusive, apparently lonely, drinking our drinks, when actually we’re keepingorder at a higher level and making adjustments to the general climate by means of subtle,seemingly meaningless activities. For example, we hear a foolish student utter a stupidsuccession of words that are either semantically asymmetrical or carry dangerously agitatedpatterns of intonation. These words are potentially disruptive and could easily upset theatmosphere in the bar. So we step in and “water down” the staccato remarks by muttering andKusters, Wouter. A Philosophy of Madness : The Experience of Psychotic Thinking, MIT Press, 2020. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/nyulibrary-ebooks/detail.action?docID=6388578.Created from nyulibrary-ebooks on 2022-02-11 02:13:48.Copyright   2020. MIT Press. All rights reserved.humming under our breath, or we offer semantic counterbalance by straightening out theasymmetrical word choices with opposing language. Our careful, well-placed injections ofsound and antisound serve to subdue the hate-filled effect of the din and mood filling the air.We would far prefer, if possible, to restructure the perspectives and orientations of the matrixin order to create an atmosphere of general well-being.I’m hard at work here on my bar stool, trying to keep everything under control. Quite afew of my associates are making the rounds, and every now and then they signal me thateverything is running well and that the students can be assured of a pleasant, peacefulevening. A man with a tanned face walks past me. The scars on his face are something heacquired during the war with the Germans. Berlin is one of the cities with the mostcontemplative underground transition spaces. Those are the spaces where you’re transformedfrom an idiot into someone with Insight. “Hey, Charlie,” I say to him, subtly referring toCheckpoint Charlie as the place where you can rotate, circulate, and invert. He glances at mein silence but with a look of understanding. I see an old acquaintance over at the slotmachine. His face hasn’t changed at all since I last saw him, and he’s still wearing the sameGoth bat cape and black makeup. He was a regular at a certain “underground” bar twentyyears ago, just like me, and ended up doing penance for his aggressive speeches andglorification of violence, just like me. Like all the Insightful Ones, he was booted out ofhistory at a certain point, and his only goal now, here on earth, is to watch over the wholeoperation, to keep it going, and to get it ready for future generations. When the atmosphereand conversational level get too steamy, it’s his job to interpellate, pay his fine by chuckingcoins into the one-armed bandit and, in this way, to keep the wheel spinning. Behind me onthe left are two boys, talking together. One of them is me, but a twenty-year younger version.It’s September again, endlessly September, and a new academic year with new opportunitieshas begun. Everything is cyclic. As time passes, the masks have to come off and new onesget put on. It’s one long costume party. Except you don’t know that at first. And I see thestudent in all his foolishness, talking with the others, full of expectation about what life willbring and not yet knowing that there is no progress and that everything keeps recurring.Every day, every year, all over again. Once you realize that, you’re out; you fall through thehole in the center of the circle. You see the never-ending repetition, and everything becomesa game. It’s like musical chairs; the only question is who’s left when the gong sounds. Thelast one has to stay and pick up the pieces. After the bar empties out, he sweeps up the glasswith his bare hands. Cuts and sacrifice. On the outside, it’s a money-and-gift system, on theinside a blood-and-pay system. I leave without waiting for the final battle.Once outside, I start walking along the canal. For a long time, I thought you could tell thedifference. Here were the Dutch people and there were the Americans. Here you had thebartenders and there the police officers. Here the sixties and there the Middle Ages. Now Iknow that all those kinds of distinctions are part of Philosophy 101. Just as Aristotle is theintroduction to Plato. It was a test and nothing but a test. Then suddenly it’s over. The gatepops open, you can go in, and they come out. And everything gets mixed up. I hear peoplespeaking English while they’re making calls on their cell phone—and in the midst of allKusters, Wouter. A Philosophy of Madness : The Experience of Psychotic Thinking, MIT Press, 2020. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/nyulibrary-ebooks/detail.action?docID=6388578.Created from nyulibrary-ebooks on 2022-02-11 02:13:48.Copyright   2020. MIT Press. All rights reserved.these medieval buildings! I used to think the earth pretty much ended at two hundred metersabove the Normal Amsterdam Water Level, but now orbiting satellites are pulling everythingaway from the center. Chuckling, I continue on my way, happy that I still have the nerve justto trust in so-called gravity. Where did we come from, anyway? Where was the beginning?What was the entrance? Everything seems like an exit, an exit with no return. Where’s thedoor, the thread that holds it all together? I hear lots of silly students speaking Dutch withother languages mixed in, along with other people and human freaks. At the end of a sidestreet, a car speeds up. I have to be careful I don’t take it too lightly. That causes suspicion.There’s always a danger of real intruders (spies!) coming in. The important thing is to keepan eye on the ground and the DNA. Mutations must be reported. Let’s go home—that’swhere it’s safest. I follow the canal. The worn-down tracks of millions of other feet form thesubstratum on which I can walk. And even if the sun never comes up again, the City willalways be here, and we will keep on going.3.2 Mad Crystal TimeMadmen sometimes lose track of what day it is. They do experience “now,” dynamic time.They also understand the historic order, static time. But they cannot make a connectionbetween the two. They no longer know what “human time” is, and they end up in theextremes of deadlocked time and moving, unsettled time. The calendar and the clock can nolonger be taken for granted or applied to anything. Merleau-Ponty writes this about oneparticular schizophrenic in Phenomenology of Perception (2012, 295): “Another patient canno longer ‘understand’ the clock, that is, first the passing of the hands from one position toanother and above all the connection of the movement with the thrust of the mechanism orthe ‘workings’ of the clock.” It’s madness, but it does have a lot in common with philosophywhen it is consistently implemented. Matthew Broome presents this train of thought, but in adifferent way, in his discussion of McTaggart and psychoses.John M. E. McTaggart was the author of the famous article “The Unreality of Time,”published in 1908, which made him the founder of the present-day analytic philosophy oftime. He argues that reflecting on time leads to an insoluble contradiction between twoviews, just as I expounded above. According to McTaggart, time therefore does not exist. In amore recent article, “Suffering and Eternal Recurrence of the Same” (2005), Broome, in turn,argues that by taking McTaggart seriously, you would end up in the same condition as that ofa psychotic. This is also my line of reasoning in this chapter. Broome (2005, 191) writes,“McTaggart notoriously claimed that time was unreal and that nothing that exists can havethe property of being in time. … Presumably McTaggart did not act on his unusual belief, orelse kept it to the philosophy study; however, some of our patients do. … Such patients maydescribe a determinate, static almost crystalline structure of time where there is no change.Others may state that they have no date of birth, have never been born, and will always ‘be.’Such an existence is almost divine-eternal and unchanging, ‘pure being.’ … This‘McTaggart’s syndrome’ can radically affect a patient’s rationality.”According to Broome, the madman is someone who experiences McTaggart’s idea inKusters, Wouter. A Philosophy of Madness : The Experience of Psychotic Thinking, MIT Press, 2020. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/nyulibrary-ebooks/detail.action?docID=6388578.Created from nyulibrary-ebooks on 2022-02-11 02:13:48.Copyright   2020. MIT Press. All rights reserved.actual practice, who reflects on it and applies it in his daily life. The real concerns of thepsychotic are the theoretical ponderings of the philosopher, which is all the more reason toinvestigate the mad experience of time in this light. Unfortunately, Broome follows this upwith “… such patients are almost impossible to interview. The very process of undertaking apsychiatric assessment, of eliciting a history, is rendered problematic. The experience is sovery alien to the interviewer that shared systems of belief are inaccessible or simply notpresent. … The proposition that has most concerned twentieth-century analytic philosophywould only be believed by someone, McTaggart aside, with a very severe, typicallydepressive psychosis. An illness that included such bizarre beliefs would likely rendercommunication with the patient, and phenomenological description of their symptoms,almost impossible.”Unlike Broome, I have decided to attempt a description of the most extreme forms of madtime. In other words, what does happen when McTaggart is taken seriously? I will discussmad time, or crystal time, with its extreme polarizations and bizarre mixtures of permanenceand mobility, in terms of space, eternity, and number.3.2.1 SpaciousnessIn her autobiography, Fiona Jong (2003, 69) writes, “In my psychosis I live in two worlds,the real world and an unreal world. This is very difficult, because I live more in the unrealworld, where everything is immobile. Time seems to be standing still. And the days of theweek don’t move, either. I don’t even know what day it is anymore, or what time it is.”8 Thestatic experience of time is what stands out here: time is no longer variable or fluid, butstationary. “Human time” has disappeared, for Jong no longer knows “what day it is,” nolonger knows how to deal with the paradox of time. Jong can no longer relate the innerpassage of time to the outer cosmic rhythms of time. The calendar doesn’t work anymore.Outer time is frozen and seems to have come to a halt.This stopping of time has a “spacializing” or “space-creating” effect, as Minkowski(1933) called it. In madness, events take place only in space. The temporariness of events isexperienced as “something spatial.” Time is “vast” and “comprehensive,” just as space andthe things in space are. Since we can change the location of things in space, the madmanbelieves we should also be able to manipulate their “location” in time. You can move throughboth space and time. Spacializing has also been reported by people under the influence ofLSD.9 With regard to madness, spaciousness or spacializing has three relevant characteristics:fragmentation, extensiveness, and reversibility.3.2.1.1 Fragmentation Because there is no “human time” in madness by whichdynamic and static time are connected, the static order of time is in danger of disintegrating.The static time axis is divided by means of moments. Moments cut time into pieces; theycause natural time to become fragmented. Each moment is like a cutting edge between a pastperiod and a coming period. In the purely static view, calendar “dates” degenerate into aloose collection of temporal elements, without any inherent coherence or lived continuity.Quoting Blankenburg again (1971, 88, 92), in reference to a patient: “She clearly wasKusters, Wouter. A Philosophy of Madness : The Experience of Psychotic Thinking, MIT Press, 2020. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/nyulibrary-ebooks/detail.action?docID=6388578.Created from nyulibrary-ebooks on 2022-02-11 02:13:48.Copyright   2020. MIT Press. All rights reserved.suffering from a lack of continuity going back in time, but of a special sort. It was not aboutthe relationship to an interval of time that could be objectively grasped—so not a defectivememory—yet her relationship to the past had changed profoundly.” (Also compare section1.2.2.4). The dynamic continuous stream no longer makes a single unit of the separateelements of time. There is no longer a calendar by which events can be organized andconnected.In order to form a unit consisting of more than “loose sand,” moments would have toreach forward and backward in time—that is, to other moments. This is possible only if themoment itself already refers to the future and the past.10 In madness, however, past and futureare not experienced as belonging to—or as aspects of—the present. This discontinuity createsfragmentation, and such fragmentation can affect the whole sense of the reality of time.(Compare the quote from Brett in section 1.2.2.4).3.2.1.2 Extensiveness When the various moments in time disconnect themselves fromeach other and are no longer organized in terms of time, they end up being “adjacent” in acertain sense. One event or time period is no longer connected to another event or period;rather, the two stand side by side. Sass (1992, 155) describes an experiment withschizophrenic patients in which they were asked to construct a story from a series of pictures:“One is given a sense neither of understandable human intentions nor of deterministic eventsthat might lend causal structure to the discourse by linking together past, present, and future.The story has a quality one might call presentism or, equally well, timelessness. Actually, it isin a sense more spatial than temporal.” Instead of making up a human story with adynamically driven narrative, the patients assembled scraps of observations and associations,as if everything were present at the same time in a quasi-reality. Time “no longer extendsitself” (in the temporal sense) back to the past but acquires a spatial extensiveness.The mad world is spatial and filled with spatial objects instead of temporal actions. Sass(1992, 156) writes, “It has been found that schizophrenics tend to use adverbs of a spatialtype to replace those of a chronological type (‘where’ may replace ‘when,’ for example) andto speak in ways that emphasize the static and deemphasize the dynamic and emotionalaspects of the world, thereby evoking a universe more dominated by objects than byprocesses or actions.” Space is filled with time, and if you remember something, you havethe feeling that you are literally looking at it, searching in a temporal space. One psychoticacquaintance of mine once said, “I can look through time,” when she noticed how vivid acertain memory was. In my book Alone (Alleen, Kusters et al., 2007) I wrote this just beforefinding myself once again in the “waking dream”: “It’s different in the waking dream ofmadness: there’s a moment when the magpie drops down, there’s a moment when the magpiesits in the grass, and there’s a moment when the magpie jumps onto the chair. All three ofthese moments are equally real and eternal. They stand side by side, frozen. The magpie doesnot fly in time but stands still, like Zeno’s arrow. A collection of moments placed side byside, with no transition between them. Time stands still; the clock encompasses all times.”The mad clock encompasses all times, but it no longer ticks.Kusters, Wouter. A Philosophy of Madness : The Experience of Psychotic Thinking, MIT Press, 2020. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/nyulibrary-ebooks/detail.action?docID=6388578.Created from nyulibrary-ebooks on 2022-02-11 02:13:48.Copyright   2020. MIT Press. All rights reserved.3.2.1.3 Reversibility If time is “like space,” you should be able to move back and forththrough time just as you can walk back and forth through space. And in the mad world, thatpossibility does indeed exist. As Sam Gerrits writes (in Kusters et al., 2007, 27), “On theblackboard I draw three axes, with arrows to indicate how they have to change in orientationand length, and a clock with two hands to indicate that time can also run backward. …[Then] I stare for a long time at the clock, wrestling with the stubborn time-axis. Time entersmy body by way of my eyes. … Time stands still. I find myself in the clockwork of Chronoshimself” (cf. J. W. Perry 197411).One of Sass’s patients (1992, 160) says, “I look for immobility. I tend toward repose andimmobilization. I also have in me a tendency to immobilize life around me. … Stone isimmobile. The earth, on the contrary, moves; it doesn’t inspire any confidence in me. I attachimportance only to solidity. A train passes by an embankment; the train does not exist for me;I wish only to construct the embankment. The past is the precipice. The future is themountain. Thus I conceived of the idea of putting a buffer day between the past and thefuture. Throughout this day I will try to do nothing at all. I will go for forty-eight hourswithout urinating. I will try to revive my impressions of fifteen years ago, to make time flowbackward, to die with the same impression with which I was born, to make circularmovements so as to not move too far away from the base in order not to be uprooted. This iswhat I wish.”Time here is only what the clock reports; the dynamic flow of time no longer counts. Theclock and the calendar no longer have any meaning in common human time, and they are nolonger essentially different from, say, chemistry’s periodic table of the elements. They show arelationship between numbers and dates, but they have little else to do with the innerexperience of time. They have become objects amidst other objects in a static spatial world.And as soon as something becomes an object it can be manipulated and reversed. So if thehands of the clock are turned back (if the psychotic turns them, for example), there’s noreason why time can’t be made to go in the other direction.Such mad crystal time is what the mad world looks like. In the landscape of madness, timelies open and exposed. The psychotic can direct time and the way time is structured, and hecan adjust and change his observations. He controls the crystals of space and time. He canevoke prehistoric time, for example, or even experience it by entering a section of virginforest, or he can explore the future by walking into a computer store. Past, present, and futureare three adjacent domains that can be entered. Yet he does not control every world orpossibility; there are still stubborn irreversibilities remaining.Back when I wrote Pure Madness (Puur waanzin, Kusters 2004), I said, “Besides thereversible processes there are also irreversible ones. When a glass falls on the floor andshatters, it’s difficult to imagine the process taking place in reverse order; it’s rare for shardsof glass to join together and rise up to become an intact glass on the edge of the table. In suchprocesses it’s obvious that time has only one possible direction. In psychotic observations,these irreversible processes assume a separate status. It’s as if reality has said that the gameof reversibility is over. It may also seem as if an ‘exit’ to a different reality has been found.Kusters, Wouter. A Philosophy of Madness : The Experience of Psychotic Thinking, MIT Press, 2020. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/nyulibrary-ebooks/detail.action?docID=6388578.Created from nyulibrary-ebooks on 2022-02-11 02:13:48.Copyright   2020. MIT Press. All rights reserved.For the psychotic, a glass that falls, food that is being digested, and paper that is being burnedare all anomalies in an otherwise reversible world. They’re intruders in reversible, timelessexistence.”Irreversible events can serve as signals that “something really irrevocable” has happened.Time in the mad world resembles the space of a computer game. Everything can bemanipulated and repeated; everything is spatial. Irreversible things are like promotions to thenext level.3.2.2 EternityWe have already come across terms such as “infinity” and “timelessness.” Often these termshave to do with eternal life, as shown in this quote from one of Conrad’s patients (1958, 80):“I will always be as old as I am now. I have eternal life, while others are getting younger andyounger instead of older and older. … I will always be on earth, I will never die, the wholeworld knows me … I have been shot and killed many times, but it never makes anydifference. If a train were to ride over me I would remain the same, just as I am now.Yesterday I was shot through the chest, and I died. … The whole world is looking for me, Iam Christ and they can do whatever they want to with me.”Now it’s time to look more deeply into the eternity of the crystal, which we will do underthree headings: eternity as endlessly continuous time, eternity as the eternal present, andeternity as the replacement of imperfect human time with perfect eternity.3.2.2.1 Eternal waiting The simplest of these three to understand is eternity as eternalwaiting. An hour can take a long time, a month and a year even longer, and if you keepexpanding this in your mind, you arrive at the idea of eternal duration. This notion of eternityis an extension or expansion of the dynamic experience of time on an endlessly long, statictimeline. Such a notion could be called static eternity, since it has to do with a spatialrepresentation of time; just as you can imagine more space behind the horizon—invisible butimaginable—so you can conceive of ever distant times beyond the horizon of the present,extending the backward gaze into the past and the forward gaze into the future.This form of eternity plays a role in Christianity (albeit a crude interpretation ofChristianity). Human existence, with its suffering, limitations, and finiteness, is enhanced andcontinued in an “eternal life,” one free from suffering, in the “hereafter.” Such an idea ofeternity can offer hope for a longer life or a delivery from life, but it can just as easilyincrease your suffering under the negative aspects of time. Indeed, time as we experience ithere and now comes to a halt when placed against the background of endless duration. Timenever advances and never makes headway, since there’s always an endless amount of time inthe distance. Moreover, if you come to realize that time stretches on endlessly, theneverything shrinks in significance; one moment is no different from any other in terms of itsfutility. And if time is eternal, negative moments may recur as well. Finally, if time stretchesendlessly in two directions, then the differences between past and future are annulled, and allour present aspirations seem pointless.Such somber thoughts of eternity are a feature of psychoses in which ordinary humanKusters, Wouter. A Philosophy of Madness : The Experience of Psychotic Thinking, MIT Press, 2020. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/nyulibrary-ebooks/detail.action?docID=6388578.Created from nyulibrary-ebooks on 2022-02-11 02:13:48.Copyright   2020. MIT Press. All rights reserved.dealings with time have disappeared. Piet Kuiper (1988, 111) writes the following about hisown depressive psychosis: “Four and a half more hours before we have to go to bed. I sat in acorner and looked at the clock, and after a while I looked at it again. Two and a half minuteshad passed, while I had estimated an hour.” This painful experience had nothing to do withan incorrect assessment of the speed of time. If that were true, Kuiper could also have beenhappy that he “had more time than he had estimated.”This, too, seems to be more than a matter of ordinary boredom or passing the time in thedentist’s waiting room. Time itself seems to have an oppressive effect. Kuiper continues,“The experience of time standing still was one of the most agonizing symptoms of myillness.” Time stands still because, in the notion of eternal duration, nothing matters anymore.Time does seem to pass when he looks at the clock. He is aware of static, physical time, buthe’s no longer aware of the human “protective layer” of narratives in which somethingmeaningful happens. All he experiences is a non-event, an eternally static smile of death. Forwhat can happen if everything is insignificant, dissolved into the great endless maw of time?Others who have suffered from this eternal duration have put it this way (in MichaelTheunissen 1991, 49 ff.): “I cannot stop thinking about the fact that time is passing … aboring, sprawling time without end … now I am talking, that lasts for so many minutes, thenI do this, then that, and all that takes sixty years, then I die, then others come along who liveabout as long as I did, eating and sleeping just like me, and then even more come along, andso it goes, on and on, meaningless, thousands of years.”3.2.2.2 The eternal present In a psychotic experience of time, the intense pondering ofthe dynamic view can also lead to obsessive brooding, to an immortalized crystal. Those ofthe dynamic view who recognize only the here and now as “real” reality and deny all realityfrom the past and the future find themselves in another kind of eternity altogether. Thiseternal present is also the ideal of many mystical or religious quests (see part II), but it’s themadmen who demonstrate what such a life-in-the-present may also imply in practice.The logic here runs as follows: If there is no longer a static order but only a collection of“data” in space, a here and now that is “present” for all eternity, then there is no absence; thatis, no absent past or future. The consciousness of time also includes the idea of eternity in thepresent, owing to the idea of infinity. Instead of static time stretching out forever in linearfashion, there is an endlessly vast and inclusive inner time. This eternity is that of the subjectof consciousness, which enfolds all of time within itself. Whenever you think about othertimes, if you are mainly aware that all those times are being thought now by yourself, thenthe line of eternity that you imagine to be horizontal becomes instead vertical (or perhaps nomore than a dot). The absence of the absent is less important than the fact that that absencecan be thought about from the present.12In such conceptions of time and eternity, only what is present is real, and what is absentdoes not exist. Everything that ever was and ever shall be is already here, in a nutshell, beforeyou. When this fact, so difficult to refute, is subjected to the most extreme reflection, it canlead to ecstatic, psychosis-like experiences and utterances. Time then comes to a halt, abeautiful crystal. Theunissen (1991, 49 ff.) states, “I felt a horrifying pain in my head, andKusters, Wouter. A Philosophy of Madness : The Experience of Psychotic Thinking, MIT Press, 2020. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/nyulibrary-ebooks/detail.action?docID=6388578.Created from nyulibrary-ebooks on 2022-02-11 02:13:48.Copyright   2020. MIT Press. All rights reserved.